 
FREEDOM MOVEMENT IN INDIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS STUDY MATERIAL PREPARED BY  
 
Dr. P. Ramesh 
Assistant Professor (T) 
Department of History  
Manonmaniam Sundaranar University 
Tirunelveli  
 

II B.A. HISTORY - III SEMESTER 
NON - MAJOR ELECTIVE 1 - FREEDOM MOVEMENT IN INDIA 
 
UNIT I 
ORIGIN OF INDIAN NATIONALISM - BIRTH OF INDIAN NATIONAL 
CONGRESS - MODERATES AND EXTREMISTS 
Causes for the rise of Indian National Movement  
Impact of  Western Education and Philosophy 
Socio-Religious Movement 
Economic Exploitation by the British 
Development of means of Communication and Transport 
Development of Indian Press and Literature 
Contact with foreign countries 
Administration of Lord Lytton 
The Ilbert Bill Controversy, 1883 - 1884 
Foundation of the Congress, 1885 A.D. 
The abusive behaviour of the British against the Indians 
Expansion of British Empire 
Indian National Congress 
Period of Moderates, 1885-1905 A.D. 
Period of Extremists, 1905-1919 A.D. 
Salient features of the Swadeshi Movement 
Muslim League, 1906 
Surat Split, 1907 
Minto-Morley Reforms, 1909 
Terrorist activities, 1907-1916 
UNIT II 
HOME RULE MOVEMENT - JALLIAN WALLAH BAGH TRAGEDY - 
THE KHILAFAT MOVEMENT. 
Home Rule Movement, 1916 

Lucknow Fact 1916 
Montagu’s Declaration, 1917 
Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms, 1919 
Rowlatt Act 1919 
Jallianwala Bagh Massacre, 1919 
Gandhian Era, 1919-1947 A.D, 
Khilafat Movement 1919 
 
UNIT III 
NON - CO-OPERATION MOVEMENT - SWARAJIST PARTY - SIMON 
COMMISSION - NEHRU REPORT 
Non co-operation movement, 1920 
Swarajya Party, 1923-1925 A.D. 
Simon Commission, 1927 
Nehru Report, 1928 
Jinnah’s Fourteen Points, 1929 
Lahore Session, 1929 
 
UNIT IV 
CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE MOVEMENT - DANDI MARCH - ROUND 
TABLECONFERENCES - GANDHI -IRWINFACT. 
Civil Disobedience Movement, 1930-1934 
Dandhi March, 1930 
First Round Table Conference, 1930 
Gandhi-twin Pact 1931 
Second Round Table Conference 1931 
Communal Award, 1932 A.D. 
Poona Pact 1932 
Third Round Table Conference, 1932 
The Government of India Act, 1935 

New Ministries 1935-1939 
Lahore Session, 1940 
August Declaration and individual Satyagraha, 1940 
Expansion of Viceroy’s Council 1941 
Cripps Mission, 1942 
 
UNIT V 
QUIT INDIA MOVEMENT - INDIAN NATIONAL ARMY – WAVELL 
PLAN - MOUNT BATTEN PLAN - DAWN OF INDIAN 
INDEPENDENCE. 
The Quit India Movement or the Revolt of 1942 
Indian National Army, 1943 
Rajagopalachari Formula, 1944 
Wavell Plan, 1945 
Simla Conference, 1945 
Cabinet Mission, 1946 
The Constituent Assembly and interim Government, 1946-1947 
Mountbatten Plan 
India Independence Act, 1947 
 

INDIAN FREEDOM MOVEMENT  
UNIT I 
ORIGIN OF INDIAN NATIONALISM - BIRTH OF INDIAN NATIONAL 
CONGRESS - MODERATES AND EXTREMISTS 
Nationalism is a sentiment- of unity among a set of- people occupying a  
particular territory,   born out  of  common  factors  such  as  language, religion polity, 
economy and administrative system. The Indian developed the concept of nationalism 
only during the British rule. In the later half of the 19th century, India is a land of 
many creeds, colours and castes. India is a epitome of the world. Politically too, It was 
never united. It was the outcome of a large number of factors and the most Important 
among them was British Imperialism. It brought about the unification of the country 
and enabled the people to think as one nation. The rise of Indian national movement 
led to the establishment of India Independence. 
Causes for the rise of Indian National Movement  
Impact of  Western Education and Philosophy 
The impact of western education and philosophy had a tremendous impact on 
nationalism. It provided the best means of understanding and developing close contact 
with one another among them. The ideas of liberty equality, democracy, self-
government and socialism began to spread rapidly due to the English language. The 
English was made the medium of instruction of education in 1835. 
Socio-Religious Movement 
The development of the various socio-religious movements of the nineteenth 
century prepared the ground for the growth of national movement and watered the 
plant of patriotism. The religious and social reformers like Raja Ram Mohan Roy, 
Swami Vivekananda, Swami Dayanand Saraswati, Keshab Chandra Sen, Debendra 
Nath Tagore, Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar and Mrs. Annie Besant created sense of 

pride among the Indians and revived the glory of ancient India. They praised past 
Indian culture and civilization  and  thus   have  the  message  of love to  their 
motherland and to the people of India. Swami Dayanand was the first who used the 
word Swaraj and declared Hindi as the national language of India. 
Economic Exploitation by the British 
The British imported the raw materials from India at a cheap price and sold the 
finished products in India at much higher prices, Moreover, there was no custom duty 
on British goods while a heavy duty was Imposed on goods exported from India. This 
policy resulted in the ruin of cottage and village industries in India. Due to Industrial 
Revolution, the British industry became technologically advanced In the world. The 
Indian Industry based on primitive technique could not complete with it. Soon India 
was reduced to the position of one of die large consumers of foreign products. Again 
the revenue policy of the British destroyed Indian agriculture. Thus, economic 
exploitation brought about a great misery In India. There was a lot of discontent and 
unrest among the people against the British rule. 
Development of means of Communication and Transport 
Railways, telegraph, wireless, postal services, construction of roads and canals 
facilitated communication among the people. All these brought them nearer to each 
other and provided the facility to organize the national movement on all India basis. 
Development of Indian Press and Literature 
The press is an Important force in society. It keeps people informed of the 
development in other parts of the world. It is also a means to mobilise public opinion 
on national issues. The first newspaper In’ India was the “Bengal Gazette”, published 
in I 780. A large number of newspapers were published in different regional languages 
of India. In 1875, there were 498 newspapers in the country. All these newspapers 
were mostly anti-British and gave publicity of racial arrogance, economic exploitation 
and personal misbehaviour of the British towards Indians. It created anti-British 
feelings among common people of India and united them against a common 

oppressor.   Prominent papers like,   “Indian Mirror”, “Bombay Samachar”, “The 
Hindu Patriot”, “The Amrit Baiar Patrika”, “The Hindu8’, “The Kesari” snd “The 
Bengali” were quite popular. They played an important role in rousing the national 
consciousness among the people. 
Indian literature also played an important role in developing the political 
consciousness and the reeling of nationalism among the people. The writings of 
Rabindra Nath Tagore appealed to the people of India to work for the glory of their 
country. Rablndra Nath Tagore ad D.L Row produced a number of national poems 
and songs. Bankim Chandra Chatterjee wrote his novel, Anand Math and the national 
song ‘Bande Mataram (Hail to the Mother) has rightly been called, “The Bible of 
Modern Bengalee Patriotism. It remained as the national anthem frorhl 1905 to 1947. 
Among other prominent writers, Madhusudan Dutt wrote in Bengali, Bhartendu 
Harish Chandra in Hindi, Narmad in Gujrati, Chiplumkar in Marathi and Bharati in 
Tamil. Dinabandhu Mitra through his Nila Darpan (Mirror of Indige) depicted the 
miserable plight of the indigo planters of Bengal. Hem Chandra Banerjee through his 
writings provoked the people to assert their legitimate rights against the Britishers. 
Similarly Bhartendu Harish Chandra highlighted the miserable condition of the people 
of India in his drama, Bharat Durdasa. In the South, Subrarnanya Bharati tried to 
promote patriotism, national solidarity and devotion for the country through his 
poems. The writings of the Indian patriots brought about a revolution in the minds of 
the Indians and helped in promoting their patriotic feelings. 
Contact with foreign countries 
Indians came in contact not only with Britain but with other foreign countries 
as well. A wave of nationalism and liberalism was prevalent in Europe in the 19th 
century. The Indian students in European Universities started to think India’s 
independence. The defeat of Russia by Japan revived the faith of the Asians in their 
strength. The Russian Revolution of 1917 inspired the national movements of every 
country on economic grounds. The First World War provided the facility of Industrial 
Development in India. Besides this, the writings of Western thinkers, such as 

Macaulay, Burke, Mill and Herbert Spencer also encouraged the feeling of 
independence, nationalism and liberalism among the minds of the Indians. Thus, the 
contact with foreign countries inspired Indian nationalism in several ways. 
Administration of Lord Lytton 
The policies of Lord Lytton accelerated the nationalist movement. The Afghan 
war during the period of Lord Lytton adversely affected the economic resources of 
India. He held a magnificent Durbar at Delhi to declare Queen Victoria as the 
Empress of India at a time when larger part of India was in the grip of famine and 
epidemic. He passed the Vernacular Press Act, 1 878 which curbed the liberty of the 
Indian press. The Arms Act of 1878 prevented the Indians from keeping the arms. The 
maximum age limit for the I.C.S. examination was reduced from 21 years to 19 years. 
It made impossible for the Indians to compete for it. The anti-Indian policy of Lord 
Lytton led to the organization of various political associations for carrying on anti-
Government propaganda in the country. 
The Ilbert Bill Controversy, 1883 - 1884 
The Ilbert Bill was passed during the Viceroyalty of Lord Ripon. It empowered 
the Indian judges to try Europeans as well. It was opposed by the British residents in 
India. They organized a systematic movement against the Bill both in England and 
India. Therefore, Lord Ripon was forced to change the Bill. This made the Indians 
unhappy. They realised that justice could not be expected from the Englishmen. It 
clearly showed the policy of racial discrimination of the British. It taught a good 
lesson to the Indians to organise a movement. 
Foundation of the Congress, 1885 A.D. 
The Indian National Congress is generally called as, ‘the soul of the national 
movement’. It was a symbol of national unity, an expression of nationalism, ft was 
founded in 1885. It prepared the platform for an organized national movement. Now 
Indian forgot their differences of caste, community and religion and began to work 
unitedly for the independence of the country. Hence the historians considered the 

history of the Congress as the history of the Indian National Movement. 
 
The abusive behaviour of the British against the Indians 
The revolt of 1857 left permanent bitterness between the British and the 
Indians. Disrespect, to Indians, beating of Indian servants and cultivators and 
disrespect to their women became common events. These happenings were given wide 
publicity by Indian newspapers. They inflamed the feelings of the Indians against the 
British which helped the growth of national consciousness. 
Expansion of British Empire 
The expansion of British empire In India helped for the rise of nationalism. 
People of different parts of India came into contact, with one another. This led to the 
political unity among the people. Not only that die began to contact with western 
countries. India was united politically and administratively under the British rule. One 
rule, one set of laws and the transfer of administrative officers from one place to 
another all over India provided the concept of one citizenship and one nation among 
the Indians. Indians from different parts of the country chalked out a common plan to 
overthrow the British rule in the country. 
Indian National Congress 
Indian National Congress was founded in 1885 by Allan Octavian Hume, a 
retired civil servant. He held the post of Secretary to the Government of India from 
1870 to 1879. At Etwah, In Bengal he started five schools and hospitals. He is said to 
be the Father of Indian National Congress. He started a vernacular newspaper, “The 
People’s Friend” in 1859 for creating national awakening among the people of India. 
Due to his critical opinions of the British policy in India, he was forced to resign in    
1882. He was very much moved by the miserable conditions of the Indian people. In 
1879, he prepared a scheme for providing relief to die poor In the South. Hume 
awakened the soul of India from the age long sleep of submission and fatalism. After 

his retirement, while addressing the graduates of the University of Calcutta, Hume 
stressed the need for an all-India organization for the mental, moral, social and 
political regeneration of the people of India. He was instrumental in the birth of the 
Indian National Congress. The Indian National Congress was an organization of 
educated Indians to remove their grievances and suggest remedies. Lord Dufferin, the 
then Viceroy ‘of India hoped that such an organization would be helpful in preventing 
the outbreak of armed resistance against British rule. So he favoured it. The first 
session of the Indian National Congress was held at Bombay on December. 28, 1885 
in the famous hail of Gakaldas, Tejpal, and Sanskrit College It was presided by W.C. 
Banerjie, a leading banister of Calcutta. 
Surendra Nath Banerjie was a great orator. He was the first Indian “o qualify 
himself for the Indian Civil Service by appearing in the open competitive examination 
in London. But later he was dismissed from service. Hence in1876, he started Indian 
Association against the British Government for the redress of the wrongs done to the 
Indians. He was one of the original founders of the Indian National Congress. He was 
elected twice the President of the Congress in 1895 and 1902. He became a minister 
under Dyarchy in Bengal. He was knighted by the British Government and thus he 
came to be known as Sir Surendra Nath Banerji. His autobiography entitled, “A 
Nation in the Making”. Seventy-two delegates from all over India attended the first 
session of the Congress. W.C. Banerji was elected as the first President of the 
Congress and A.O. Hume was the first General Secretary of the organization. A.O. 
Hume held this post till 1907. The congress followed the principles of “Pray, petition 
and protest”. It used to pass resolution and petition in order to press the Government 
to give reforms. This policy was nicknamed as “Political mendicancy”, begging for 
political concessions. They published a journal called “India” from London. 
The chief objects of the Congress were to promote the personal intimacy and 
friendship among all the earnest workers in the country. Secondly, it was to eradicate 
the prejudices of race, creed and province. Thirdly, it was to act as a link between 
England and India. Fourthly, it was to keep authoritative record of the nature Indians 
about important matters of India and lastly it aimed at the reforms in political, social 

and scientific fields. In 1889, a branch of the congress was started in England. 
The history of the Congress was divided Into three periods, Period of 
Moderates, 1885-1905, Period of Extremists, 1905 1919 and Gandhi an Era 1919-
1947, The Congress was an all-India Institution and had the support and co-operation 
of the Hindus, Muslims, Parsees, Sikhs, Christians, Anglo-Indians and Europeans’. 
W.C. Banerjie, the first president of the Congress was an Indian Christian. Dadabhai 
Naoroji became the next President of the Congress in 1886 in the Calcutta session. He 
was a Parses. The third President of congress was Badruddlsi Tayyabji in die Madras 
session in 1887. He was a Muslim. The fourth and fifth Presidents George Mool and 
William Wedderbum were Britishers. 
Period of Moderates, 1885-1905 A.D. 
Congress was dominated by the moderates for the period of first twenty years. 
Prominent among them were A.O. Hume, Dadabai Naoroji, Gopala Krishna Gohale, 
Surendra Nath Banerfee, Badruddin Tyabji, Pherozshah Mehta, Ramesh Chandra 
Datt, Anand Mohan Ghcse, Mahadev Govind Ranade, Motilal Ghosh, Madan Mohan 
Malavia and Subramaniya Iyer. Most of these leaders believed in constitutional 
agitation. The leader of the Moderates was G.K. Gokhale. Gopala Krishna Gokhale 
started his career as a teacher of history and economics at Ferguson College, Poona till 
1902. He was a follower of Justice Mahadev Govind Ranade. [Ranade was a great 
scholar, thinker, patriot and social reformer. He founded the Deccan Educational 
Society. It started a school at Poona which later developed into the Ferguson College. 
Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya described Ranade as the power behind the Indian National 
Congress. He believed that political progress was not possible without social progress. 
His important books were “Essays on Indian Economies’, “Essays on Religious and 
Social Reforms” and “Rise of the Mahratta Power”.] Gokhale went to” England in 
1897 to give evidence before the Wilby Commission on Indian expenditure. Gokhale 
was elected as the President of the Indian National Congress in 1905. He founded the 
Servants of India Society at Poona in 1905. It trained the social workers for the service 
of the people. He pleaded for the abolition of India Council. As a member of the 

Royal Commission on the Public Services, he pleaded for the Indianisation of 
services. He introduced a bill in the Imperial Legislative Council (1911) for the 
Introduction of compulsory and primary education. Tilak called him “the diamond of 
India”, “Jewel of Maharashtra” and the “Prince of Drkers”, Gandhiji once compared 
Tilak to the Himalaayas and Gokhale i the holy river Ganges. 
The most important person in the Congress was Dadabai Naoroji, the -rand old 
man of India, He was the first Indian to be chosen as Professor Elphinstone College, 
Bombay, as he founded the first Girl’s High School, he was called as the Father of 
Women Education. He was selected as the president of the congress three times 1886, 
1893 and 1906, He gave his views in the famous book entitled, “Poverty and un 
British rule in India”, In this book, he explained that economic exploitation of the 
British and over population were responsible for the poverty of India. Dadabhai Naorji 
was the first in India to become a member of the British Parliament. He pleaded for 
the conduct of I.C.S. examination simultaneously both in India and England. He was 
the first Indian member of the Royal Commission. “Swarai’ was the key-note of his 
Presidential address at the Calcutta session of Congress in 1906. In that session, 
longress passed a resolution on self government, boycott movement, Swadeshl and 
National education. He founded the British Indian Society in England. 
The Moderates were educated. They livied in the cities. They were unable to 
realise the real condition of the poor people. Therefore, they failed in attracting the 
mass. They supported the British Government, because they thought that the 
Britishers came to India to liberate the disunity and remove the ignorance among the 
Indians. They believed that the political grievance was only due to the British 
bureaucracy. The reforms demanded by the moderates were abolition of India Council 
at London, conducting the I.C.S. examinations both in England and India, reduction of 
military budget, reduction of salt tax, Imposition of protective tariff, reforms and 
expansion of legislative councils both at- the centre and the provinces, establishment 
of technical and industrial school separation of the judiciary and’ the executive, safe-
guarding the interests of the Indians abroad, removal of restrictions on press and  
criticized the Arms Act, the salt tax and excise duties. 

The moderates attempted to awaken the political consciousness and national 
spirit of the Indians and educate and unite them on political questions. The leaders of 
the congress believed that the British people, Parliament and the administrators’ were 
ignorant of the affairs of India and if they were told about the correct picture of Indian 
affairs, they would certainly do justice to Indians. Therefore, they also sent, several 
deputations to Britain and attempted to convert British public opinion in favors of 
their demands, in the mean time, a severe famine took place In 1896 and there was a 
heavy toll of life. The people were not in a position to pay taxes. So Tilak started “no-
tax campaign”. During this movement, two British officers were killed in Poona. Tilak 
was arrested as he instigated violence. The only achievement of the Moderates was 
that the Government passed the India Council Act in 1 892. It was the direct outcome 
of the reforms demanded by the moderates. Most of their demands were given one by 
one in later period. The early nationalists or the so-called Moderates dominated the 
Congress up to 1916. Within the Congress, a group of people realized the futility of 
the Ideology and techniques of the moderates and formed a group or parties which 
were called the Extremists. As the Extremists dominated the congress in 1916, the 
Moderates detached themselves from the congress and formed a separate party, the 
Indian Liberal Federation. But the party remained ineffective and insignificant in the 
politics of the country. 
Period of Extremists, 1905-1919 A.D. 
 
An extremist party developed within the congress under the leadership of Bala 
Gangadhar Tilak, a Maratha Brahmin. The Extremists criticized the Moderates that 
they failed to gain anything substantial from the government. Tilak also criticized the 
practice of sending humble petitions to the Government. He appealed to the historic 
past, organized annual festivals in commemoration of Shivaji and started two 
newspapers, Marathi paper, Kesari and the Maharatta (English) to propagate his 
views. He stood for a Hindu revival and opposed westernization. He founded an Anti-
Cow Killing Society, For his extremist activities, he was arrested and sent to 
Mandalay jail in Burma for six years. There be wrote, “Gita Rahsya” and “Arctic 
Home of the Aryans”. He is called, as “The Father of Indian Revolution” for his 

revolutionary spirit. He was also a great social reformer. He organized relief 
measurers during floods and earned the name,-”Lokamanya’ by the people. He started 
the Home Rule Movement In 1916. He preached the gospel of “bombs”. He was the 
uncrowned king of Maharashtra. Valentine Chirol, and Englishman called Tilak as, 
“Father of India’s Unrest”. 
Bipin Chandra Pal (Bengal) and Lab Lajpat Hal (Punjab) were two other well-
known radicals. Lala Lajpat Rai was popularly known as Sher-tn-Punjab. (The Lion of 
the Punjab). By his writings and speeches, he stirred the people out of their slumber. 
He played a leading part in the foundation and growth of the D.A.V. College, Lahore. 
Before joining politics, he wrote the biographies of Mazzini, Garibaldi, Shivaji, Lord 
Krishna and Swami Dayanand and the books of “Unhappy India” and “Hindu-Muslim 
Unity”. When the earthquake took place in Kangra in 1905, he did a lot to help the 
people in distress. Lala Lajpat Rai was deported to Mandalay for his agitation against 
the increase of water rates by the Punjab Government. There, he wrote the well-
known book called, “The Story of My Deporation”. In 1914, he went to England and 
then to America. In England he wrote his books, “The Arya Samaj”, “England’s Debt 
in India” and “Young India”. He came to India in 1920. He was elected as the 
President of the Congress of the special session held in Calcutta in 1920. He brought 
out three papers, Punjabi, Bande Matram (an Urdu daily) and People (an English 
Weekly). He died as a martyr in 1928 when he demonstrated against the arrival of 
Simon Commission, 
Bipin Chandra Pal was one of the famous trios known as Bal-Pal-Lal 
(Balagangadhar Tilak, Bipin Chandra Pal and Lala Lajpat Rai). His great contribution 
lay in organizing and leading the Extremist wing of the Congress. He was a great 
orator. He carried the message of boycott, Swadeshi and national education in every 
nook and comer of the country. 
His writings in New India and Bands Matram exercised a great influence on die 
youth of the country. He was prosecuted for his article, “Aetiology of the Bomb”‘, But 
he apologised. He opposed the cult of begging and stood for complete Swaraj, 

The partition of Bengal (190S) by Lord Curzon gave rise to extremism in 
politics; Indians thought that it would bring division between the Hindus and the 
Muslims. They rightly argued that if the partition was necessary for the sake of 
administrative convenience, then the Hindi speaking Bihar and the Oriyya speaking 
Orissa could be separated from Bengal. The and-partition of Bengal movement gave 
birth to the boycott of foreign manufactured goods and Swadeshi Movement (use of 
Indian made articles) in 1905. Mass meetings were held all over Bengal, shops selling 
foreign goods were picketed, foreign goods were burnt and social boycott was 
observed against those people who did not engage themselves in the boycott of 
foreign goods. At several places, the cobblers refused to mend English shoes, the 
cooks and servants refused to serve their master using foreign goods, the washermen 
boycotted washing of foreign clothes, the priests refused to officiate in marriage 
ceremonies where foreign cloth was used and the students refused to appear in the 
Examination on the ground that the answer books supplied to them were made of 
foreign paper. 
On October 16, 1905, the day when partition was to be effective, was 
celebrated saw the Rakhi-Bandhan day (tying of yellow threads on the arms of each 
other as the symbol of bond of union between each other). The idea was conceived by 
RaWndranath Tagore. He composed short verses emphasizing the unity of the 
Bengalis. On that day, the markets in Calcutta remained closed and the streets were 
echoed by the singing of Bande Mataram song. The Government did not remain a 
silent spectator to these happenings. Political leaders were put into prison without trial 
The students were debarred form appearing In the examinations and government 
service. Shouting of Bande Mataram was banned. Newspapers were suppressed. The 
Muslims were encouraged to oppose the Hindus. The picketers were lathicharged. 
The Swadeshi Movement continued up to 1907. Surendra Nath Banerjee toured all 
over India to get sympathy of the Indians in other provinces towards the movement. 
The movement gave encouragement to Indian industries.  
 Many textile mills, soap and match factories, handloom and weaving factories 

and national banks were opened. It resulted in the opening of a large number of 
national schools. The movement awakened the political consciousness of the people at 
large and gave a new and definite shape to the spirit of nationalism. 

 
Salient features of the Swadeshi Movement 
Samitis played an important role to achieve freedom. The new types of Samits 
(not local political associations) came into existence to popularize the Boycott and 
Swadeshi. In course of time, they became local associations for various types of social 
and economic which included relief work during famine or any natural calamity like 
earthquake and helping the pilgrims. But laid special stress on peaching Swadeshi 
through 
lectures, 
patriotic 
songs, 
and 
dramatic 
performances. 
(called 
Yatra),organizing Swadeshi schools, promoting indigenous arts and crafts and 
exhibition thereof in meals, social boycott of persons who used foreign goods and in 
rare cases establishment of arbitration courts and Panchayat for settling disputes 
without going to the British courts. Special attention was also paid to the physical 
culture and moral training of the volunteers of these samities. 
The Samitis worked for the growth of indigenous industry and national schools. 
By that the Boycott became effective in various ways and carried these ideas to 
remote and inaccessible villages among the masses. A Police Report in 1909 gives a 
list of different Samitis. The Government banned five principal Samitis in January, 
1909. The Samitis served as breeding grounds and training centers for terrorist 
movements. The Industrial strike of labor union was a special feature of the Swadeshi 
Movement. The first organized revolutionary secret society in Bengal was Anusilan 
Samiti. It earned on its activities” partly in public and partly in secret. There were 
clubs for training youths in all sorts of physical drill and exercises, such as lathi, 
sword and dagger-play, riding, swimming, and in some cases also boxing. It attracted 
a large number of young men. The Anusilan Samiti got a large number of recruits and 
hundreds of branches Were started in different parts of Bengal its Head Office was at 
Calcutta. 
The Extremists stood for absolute autonomy for India, They fixed up their goal 
as Swaraj. Tilak declared that, “Swaraj is my birthright and I shall have it”, the 
repression by the Government of the anti-partition of Bengal movement and the 

Extremists resulted in revolutionary terrorism. They felt that passive resistance would 
not bring any success and the British should be expelled from India by force. There 
was a chance of split in the congress in 1906. It mm avoided by Dada Bai Naoroji, the 
then President of the congress. 
Muslim League, 1906 
The Muslims in India were growing suspicious of the Hindu majority. 
Moreover the British were alarmed by the wide spreading Influence of the Congress 
and tried to create a division between Hindus and Muslims. There was a section of the 
Muslims who regarded the congress as an institution of the Hindus and demanded for 
the founding of a separate institution for Muslims. The Muslim League was formed on 
December l 3, 1906, during the time of Lord Minto under the leadership of Nawab 
Slimullah of Dacca and Prince Aga Khan. It was formed to support partition of Bengal 
and oppose boycott of British goods. Later, the Muslim League was developed by 
Mohammad AliJinnah. Ultimately, it led to the formation of Pakistan. The first 
session of the League was held at Karachi in Sind on 29* December 1907. Sind was 
the first place conquered by Mohammed Bin Qasim. The British sowed the seeds of 
dissension in the Indian politics by introducing communal electorates by the Act of 
1909 or Mino-Morley Reforms. Important aims of the Muslim League were, to sent 
their representative institutions through separate communal electorates and due 
representation for the Muslims in the local boards. University bodies, Courts, Public 
services and legislative councils. 
Surat Split, 1907 
Surat Session was presided by Dr. Rash Behari Chose In 1907, at the Surat 
session of the congress, there was much difference over the selection of the President. 
The Extremists suggested that Lata Lajpat Rai who was: released after deportation 
from Buma should be elected president to mark the country’s indignation and protest 
against the unfair treatment accorded to him by the Government. Moderates chose 
Rashbehari Chose as their candidate. The Moderates scored a nominal victory. 
Difference developed over the issue of the visit of the Prince of Wales in January, 

1906. Tilak and his followers opposed the Idea of sending the message of welcome to 
the Prince of Wales. The real trouble started when the moderates- excluded the 
resolutions on “Boycott” and “National Education” from the programmer of the 
conference. Rowdyism broke out on account of differences between the two parties, 
particularly on the refusal of the chairman to discuss Swaraj and the police was called 
in to restore order. The extremists left the Congress. This spilt weakened the congress. 
Now object of the congress was to obtain dominion status for India by peaceful 
means. 
Minto-Morley Reforms, 1909 
The Surat Split was a turning point in the history of nationalist movement in 
India. The reforms were undertaken by the Government to foreigners the Moderates. 
The Minto-Morely Reforms of 1909 was said to be the direct outcome of the Surat 
Split. In introduced the communal representation for Muslims. In increased the 
members of the Imperial Legislative council and Provincial Legislative Councils. This 
act did not give Indians adequate representation in running their own administration, e 
by side, the Government also continued the policy of repression towards the 
Extremists. As a result of Government’s policy of repression, Tilak was detained in 
Mandalay jail (Burma) from 1908 to I914 without trail for two fiery articles in the 
“Kesri” in connection with a bomb idem incident at Muzaffarpur in Bihar.  
Terrorist activities, 1907-1916 
The repression by the government of the anti-partition of Bengal movement 
and the Extremists resulted in revolutionary terrorism. The methods of the terrorists 
were entirely different from those of the Extremists and the Moderates. They were 
inspired by an intense love for the motherland and to get freedom quickly from the 
hands of the foreigners by violent means. The extremists formed secret societies for 
this purpose. They manufactured bombs and other arms, engaged in murders of 
official propagated revolutionary ideas through newspapers, books and pamphlets and 
made dacoities to collect money for their purpose. There were cases of rioting, arson 
and murder In different parts of the country. The revolutionary activities of the Indians 

continued till the end of the World War I. Tilak begin to associate himself more and 
more with the terroristic activities after Surat Split. Tilak was attested in Bombay on 
June 24, 1908 on charges relating to the publication in the Kesari of seditious articles. 
He was tried and found guilty. He was given a sentence of transportation for six years 
at Mandalay. In the extreme south, the Swadesi Steam Navigation Company of V.O. 
Chithambaram PillaS carried on the trade between Tuticorin and Colombo; it was a 
private shipping company. It could not compete with the British Shipping Company. 
Hence it failed. Patriotic feelings were inflamed in the course of the Swedish 
company’s struggle for survival and a British official was shot dead. 
The Government of Lord Minto took a series of drastic measures to suppress 
them. The Seditious Meetings Act (1907). The Public Meetings Act, the Indian Press 
Act (1910), the Explosive Substances Art (1908), the Newspaper Act (1908) (refusing 
permission for holding certain meetings or addressing them) and the Criminal Law 
Amendment Act (1908) were passed. By the Criminal Law Amendment Act, a special 
form of trial for the terrorist offences was followed. Many terrorist leaders were 
deported of India. Several circulars and ordinances abrogating the rights of free 
speech and free criticism were issued. Processions, meetings and demonstrations were 
banned. Students and citizens were prohibited from taking part in politics. Press 
prosecutions were witnessed everywhere. The Yugantar, the Sandhya md the Bande 
Matram were suppressed. Police raid, house searches, confiscations and espionage 
became the order of the day. 
Revolutionary societies modelled upon Russia and Italian secret societies for 
executing acts of terrorism came into existence. Cult of Bomb was openly preached 
through - Yugantara by B.K, Ghosh, the brother of Aurobindo Ghosh and Bhupendra 
Math Dutta, the brother of Swarni Vivekanand. A train carrying the Lieutenant 
Governor of Bengal was blown up. Revolutionary activities led by V. Sarvarkar and 
S.K. Verma was vigorously propagating against the atrocities of the British 
government in England. In 191 1, due to great opposition, the partition of Bengal was 
cancelled by king George V of England at the time of Delhi visit during Lord 
Hardinge, The capital was transferred from Calcutta to New Delhi, The revolutionary 

movement was extremely active in Bengal and Punjab during 1913-1916. A Ghadar 
Party was organized under Har Dayal, a revolutionary from Punjab in 1915 at San 
Franscisco in U.S.A. He was assisted by Ram Chandra and Barkatufia. The party also 
published weekly paper, the Ghadar (rebellion) in commemoration of the Mutiny of 
1857. The Ghadar patty highlighted the point that Indian were not respected in the 
world abroad because they were to free. Due to the complaints made by the British 
representative, the U.S. authorities compelled Hardayal to leave United States. With 
the outbreak of World War Hardayal and other Indians abroad moved to Germany and 
set up the Indian Independence Committee at Berlin, it sent explosives to Indian 
Revolutionaries and even organise an invasion of British India to liberate the country. 
Tilak was released in 1914 and he led the people to swara). The moderate 
leaders, Pherozeshah Mehta and Gokhale died in 1915. Through the efforts of Mrs. 
Annie Besant, the extremists re-entered into the congress in 1916 at the Lucknow 
session of the congress and at its Calcutta session in 1917- where Mrs. Annie Besant 
was elected as the President of the congress and it declared Home Rule as its goal. 
The moderates supported the government of India in its war efforts. The reason-was 
that they would be givers responsible government after the war. The extremists 
realized that they would get something only by intensifying the national movement. It 
resulted in the formation of two Home Rule Leagues in 1915-1916. One under the 
leadership of Tilak in Bombay and another under Mrs. Annie Besant and S. 
Subramaniya Ayer in Madras. The two Leagues very soon merged themselves into 
one and It propagated the demand for the Home Rule or self-government to India after 
the war. The emergence of Mahatma Gandhi, the messiah of peace and love and the 
message of truth and non-violence gave a terrible blow to this movement of violent 
extremists. 
 

UNIT II 
HOME RULE MOVEMENT - JALLIAN WALLAH BAGH TRAGEDY - 
THE KHILAFAT MOVEMENT. 
Home Rule Movement, 1916 
Mrs. Annie Besant and B.C. Tilak formed the Home Rule Leagues in 1916. 
The ultimate aim was self-government. They wanted to work with in the British to 
change India society sufficiently for self-government; it demanded equal status for the 
Indians in army, defense forces and other high positions. The original name of Mrs. 
Annie Besant was Miss Wood. She was born in 1847. When she was hardly five, her 
father died arid she had to face many difficulties In her childhood. She was married to 
a clergyman in 1 867. But soon differences arose between husband and wife and 
ultimately she was forced to leave her husband’s house. Her association with Mr. 
Bradlaugh, Mrs. Annie Besant stowed herself to be a great organizer, a writer and a 
great thinker. She fought successfully for the cause of the English girls who were 
working in the match factories. 
Mrs. Annie Besant came to India in 1893 as a member of the Theosophical 
Society. For about twenty years, she confined her activities in India to religious, social 
and educational fields. She was responsible for the revival of Hinduism through social 
reforms and education. She wrote several books on Hinduism and translated the 
BagawatGita into English. She condemned early marriage and forced widowhood in 
Hindu society. She stood for equality for woman In India. She started the Central 
Hindu High School and College at Banaras which later on developed into the Banaras 
Hindu University. Mrs. Annie Besant frequently visited England as the President of 
Theosophical Society. During her visit, she was Impressed by the Home Rule 
Movement carried on by Redmond In favor of Ireland, She entered the political field 
In 1914 and started a weekly,  ’’the common wheel” which later changed into a daily 
paper. New India published from Madras. She founded Home Rule League in 1916. 
She was supported by Bala Gangadhar Tilak in her campaign. She explained the 
Home Rule to work as an auxilliary to the Indian National Congress. 

Mrs. Annie wanted to bring a union between the Moderates and Extremists 
which would give strength to her Home Rule. Due to her efforts, the Extremists re-
joined the congress in 19! 6. She was selected as the President of the Indian National 
Congress in 1917 in the Calcutta session. Mrs. Besant was In favor of Swadeshi. She 
was opposed to the boycott of British goods. Her fiery speeches did a lot for the 
national wakening in the country. Tilak worked for the Home Rule League in 
Maharashtra and Central Provinces, in July, 1916, a case was registered against Tilak 
for his seditious speeches, Mrs. Besant’s “Mew India” was closed on 15th June 1917 
and the Government took action against her two-co-workers, G.S. Arundale and B.P. 
Wadia. A Joint- meeting of the All India Congress Committee and the Council of 
Muslim League was held in July 1917, which greatly praised the work done by the 
Home Rule league condemned the attitude of the Government, it also made a 
representation to the Viceroy and the Secretary of State for India, pleading for grant of 
self-government gradually. She did not approve the Non-Cooperation Movement 
started by Mahatma Gandhi and consequently she left the congress. In spite of that, 
she continued to fight for the cause of India’s freedom till her death, 1933. The 
branches of Theosophical society were established at Kanpur, Allahabad, Ahmedabad 
and Cailcut. 
Lucknow Fact 1916 
The Indian Muslims were not happy with the war of Britain against Turkey 
advantage of the anti-British feelings among the Muslims, were made both by the 
League and the Congress to settle their ices with a view to work faintly against the 
Government. In 1916, he Congress and the Muslim League held their annual sessions 
at w where the Luck now Pact was signed. The congress accepted the demands of the 
Muslim League, Weightage (giving larger representation to Muslims in Legislative 
Councils as compared to their population in respective provinces), Communal Veto 
(no bill would be as law unless the majority of the representatives of the affected 
community agreed for it) and the Communal Electorate System. The Luck now Pact 
was an important step towards Hindu-Muslim unity at that time. But later it paved the 
way for communalism. 

Montagu’s Declaration, 1917 
The British Government felt that some sort of constitutional reforms were 
necessary in India after the First World War. Moreover during the First World War, 
the Turks defeated the British army in 1916. Hence the English wanted to get the 
support of the Indian in the war. Montague, the then Secretary of State for India 
Issued the August Declaration in 1917. By that he promised to give responsible 
government to the Indians after the war. He requested the Indians to help them during 
the war. Indians agreed to it. They offered 160 million pounds for was finance. About 
30,000 Indian soldiers Said down their lives during the world war. The First World 
War came to an end in 1918. On the basis of Montagu’s Declaration and to further 
satisfy the Indians the act of 1919 was passed. As Chelmsford, the then Viceroy of 
India and Montagu, Secretary of State for India joined together to bring reforms, the 
act-of 1919 was called as Montagu-Chelmsford reforms. 
Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms, 1919 
The Act of 1919 marked the beginning of parliamentary form of government in 
India. Departments or provincial Governments were run both by the ministers and the 
official members in the provinces. This arrangement was known as “Dyarchy” or 
“Double rule”. Indians were dissatisfied with the Act of 1919. Since it did not give 
sufficient power to run their own administration. 
Rowlatt Act 1919 
The Act of 1919 disappointed the Indians and they started agitation against the 
act. The Government of India had persuaded ail possible measures to suppress the 
Extremists and particularly the terrorists. Hence the Government of India set up a 
committee in 1917 under Justice Rowlatt of the King’s Bench to report the nature and 
extent of the revolutionary movement and to suggest ways of dealing with it. The 
report of Rowlatt was published In 1918 and on its recommendations, the Rowlatt Act 
was passed in 1919. This act gave an extra-ordinary power to the Government in 
dealing with the freedom fighters. It authorised the Government to imprison any 

person without trial and conviction in a court of law. This infuriated Gandhlji. 
Gandhiji appealed to the nation to observe national hartal against the Black 
Laws. The Rowlett act brought Gandhiji to the national political arena. He declared on 
February 24, 1919 to lead a campaign of Satyagraha if the act was passed. He formed 
a Satyagraha Sabah. The members took a pledge to disobey the Black act mon-
violently. Gandhiji inaugurated the Satyagraha Movement by fixing March 30, 1919 
as a day of hartal (stoppage of work), fasting, prayer and penance, meetings and 
processions all over the country to condemn the Act. The date was subsequently 
changed to April 6th, 1919. News of the change of date did not reach the north in time 
and demonstrations were held in Delhi, Lahore and Amritsar. The demonstrators 
clashed with the police who opened fire. Violence and loss of life in demonstrations 
shocked Gandhiji. He started to go to the trouble spots in the north. Hence he was 
arrested it Delhi railway station and sent to Bombay. He undertook the editing of two 
new weeklies, the Young India in English and Nava Jivan in Gujarati For the purpose 
of educating his countrymen in the technique of Satyagraha. 
Jallianwala Bagh Massacre, 1919 
The arrest of Gandhi and the ban on his entry into Punjab increased tension in 
Amristar. The Congress leaders of Punjab, Kitchlew and Satyapal were arrested and 
deported and the military was called to suppress the riot. Brigadier-General, Dyer 
arrived from Jullundar and at once prohibited all public meetings. To protest against 
the Rowlatt Act, forceful recruitment of soldiers and heavy tax collections, the people 
held a meeting in Jallianwaia Bagh in Amritsar on April 13, 1919 at 4.P.M. Without 
any prior intimation, General Dyer surrounded the park with troops. He shot down to 
death 379 people within a few minutes and thousands were wounded. Violence 
therefore erupted in Punjab and Government declared martial law. This incident is 
called as Jallianwala Bagh Massacre or Punjab Massacre. Or Amritsar Massacre. This 
incident rose the national feelings among the people of India. The reign of terror of 
Dyer was approved -by the Lieutenant Governor of Punjab, Michael O’Dwyer and his 
government and Dyer was promoted GO a higher rank in the Afghan war that 

followed. Though he was retired the Indian government granted pension continuously. 
Dyer was referred to as a saviour of British rule in India in the House of Lords. 
Twenty years after his retirement, he fell a victim to an Indian assassint’s bullet 
(Likram Chand). 
Rabindra Nath Tagore surrendered him title of “Sir” and Shankar Ram Nagar 
resigned from the membership of viceroy’s council. Gandhiji suspended the 
satyagraha movement on April, IS, 1919 due to violence in Punjab and Bengal. He 
declared his “Satyagraha campaign a Himalayan miscalculations”, because he had 
committed the mistake of entristing nonviolence to the people who were not trained 
for it. After the lallianwaia Bagh Massacre, Gandhiji took up the leadership of the 
Indian National Congress. 
Gandhian Era, 1919-1947 A.D, 
Mohan Das Karamchand Gandhi was bom in 1869 at Porbandar in Gujarat. He 
took his law degree in England. In 1893, he went to South Africa in connection with a 
case. There he saw the poor conditions of the Indians. He started non-violent 
Satyagraha against the South African Government. He and his followers were 
arrested. Finally he got success in this struggle, in 1915, he returned to India. He used 
non-violent Satyagraha for the benefit of the peasants in Bihar and Gujarat. There also 
he got success. Gandhiji joined the Indian politics at the instance of Gokhale, Gandhiji 
used to explain his programmers for strengthening India by pointing to the five fingers 
of his hand, exhorting the people to practise five virtures - spinning, removal of 
untouchability, sobriety (non-consumption of alcohol or opium). Hindu-Muslim amity 
and equality for women. The fine virtues were to be achieved through non-violent 
methods. Gandhiji took the leadership of the Indian National Congress in 1919 after 
the Jallianwaia Bagh Massacre. 
Khilafat Movement 1919 
The Indian Muslims regarded the Calipah and Sultan of Turkey as the spiritual 
head of Islam. The British Government Imposed harsh terms in Turkey after the 

World war by the- Treaty of Severes (1919). It deprived many of its territories and 
rights, its army and navy were reduced. It had to pay of huge war Indemnity. This was 
resented by the Indian Muslims, Under the leadership of Ail brothers (Muhammad All 
and Shaukat All) and Maulana Abdul Kafam Aiad, they started the Khilafat 
Movement for the preservation of the office of Khilafat and a better treatment for 
Turkey. Mahatma Gandhi wanted to get. The support of the Muslims in the freedom 
struggle. He viewed the Khilafat agitation as a golden opportunity for bringing the 
Hindus and Muslims together on the national front. Hence Gandhiji attended the first 
Khilafat conference at Delhi, 23rd November, 1919 and gave his whole-hearted 
support to the Khilafat movement. In the Khilafat conference, Gandhiji announced the 
non-Gooperatfon Movement. The congress adopted the Khilafat Movement as a part 
of the non-cooperation movement. This led to the active participation of the Muslims 
in large numbers in the non-cooperation movement. There was unrest among 
industrial labourers due to Khilafat Movement. This movement increased the Hindu-
Muslim unity. However, later, the office of Caliphate was abolished in 1924 in Turkey 
itself by ustapha Kamal Pasha. Turkey was declared as a secular republic. The Khalifa 
movement thus disappeared. 
UNIT III 
NON - CO-OPERATION MOVEMENT - SWARAJIST PARTY - SIMON 
COMMISSION - NEHRU REPORT 
Non co-operation movement, 1920 
The congress decided to launch the Satyagraha movement in India for 
achieving Swaraj and Gandhiji was entrusted with the work. Gandhiji placed a few 
demands before the Government on behalf of the Congress.The Government should 
express its regret on the happenings in Punjab, particularly in Amritsar. The British 
government should adopt a lenient attitude towards Turkey. Some new schemes of 
reforms should be placed before the Indian people who take India nearer to its gol of 
‘Swaraj’. In case these demands were not fulfilled, he threatened the Government to 
start the non-cooperation movement. The Government paid no attention towards these 

demands. Therefore Mahatma Gandhi started the all, non-violent and non-cooperation 
movement against the Government August,1920. 
 
Gandhiji appealed to the Indians not to co-operate with the in any way and not 
to render service of any form to the government. It envisaged the surrender of titles, 
boycott of the legislative bodies, courts, the foreign goods and the Government’s 
educational institutions. Besides these, there was the Constructive programme of 
communal unity, abolition of untouchability, prohibition, swadeshi, hand-spinning 
and encouragement of khadi, national education and the emancipation of women. 
Gandhiji toured the whole of India to spread the message of this struggle. 
Gandhiji returned the Kaiser-i-Hind Medal awarded to him by the Government 
for his services during the First World War. Many distinguished persons like C.R.Das, 
Motilal Nehru, jawaharlal Nehru, Lala Lajpat Rai and Rajendra Prasad gave up their 
legal practice and joined the movement. The people avoided law courts. Regional 
Panchayats took the place of local courts. Many students gave up studies in 
Government schools and colleges. National institutions like Gujarat Vidyapith, the 
Bihar Vidyapith, the Tilak Maharastra Vidyapith, Kashi Vidyapith and the Bengal 
National University were established. The jamla Milia at Aligarh and Delhi and many 
others were founded all over the country. The Swadeshi became popular; khadi 
became a symbol of freedom. A bonfire of foreign goods followed. They picketed in 
front of liquour shops. The Tilak Swaraja Fund was started to finance the non-
cooperation movement and within six months over a crore of rupees were subscribed. 
Women even surrendered their jewellery. The Khilafat Committee and the congress 
advised the people not to serve the government which degraded India socially, 
politically, and economically. The visit of the Prince of Wales was boycotted. A 
complete hartal was observed in Bombay on 17th November, 1921, the day of his 
arrival at Bombay.  
Lord Reading was the then viceroy of India at that time. He used all methods to 
suppress the movement. The language of lathi was used by the Government to deal 
with the peaceful Satyagrahls, But, certain violent Incidents were committed’ by the 

people. The-worst happened at Chauri Chaura, a police station, 15 miles from 
Gorakhpur in Uttar Pradesh on February 5th, 1922. There the police opened fire on a 
mob of peasants; the infuriated mob attacked the policemen. They took shelter in the 
thana (police-post). The mob burnt the thana which resulted In the death of twenty-
two policemen inside the building. Gandhiji immediately suspended the non-
cooperation movement in 1922. The congress leaders criticized Gandhiji for that. 
Government took advantage of the changed situation and arrested Gandhiji. When he 
was brought to the- court of Ahmedabad, C.N Broom Field, the District Sessions 
judge of Ahmedabad stood up and showed respect to Gandhiji eventhough he was 
brought on allegation. On charges of treason, Gandhiji was sentenced to a six year 
imprisonment in Yeravada jail, Poena. Since then, he was called the Mahatma. 
Gandhiji was released from jail by the Government in February, 1924 due to his 
illness. Gandhiji’s principle of non-violence began to spread to western countries. 
French philosopher, Romain Rolland honoured him by writing his biography. 
Swarajya Party, 1923-1925 A.D. 
The suspension of Non-Cooperation movement by Gandhiji was not approved 
by the national leaders like Motital Nehru, Chitranjan Das (C.R.Das), N.C. Kelkar and 
others. These leaders favoured the idea of entering the legislative bodies in order to 
obstruct and destroy the system Tom within. C.R. Das or Chittaranjan Das was 
popularly known as Deshbandhu. He played an important role in the national struggle 
for freedom. He started his life as a lawyer. He attracted the public attention in 1908 
after the Alipore Bomb conspiracy case. He was associated with the publication of a 
Bengali monthly, ‘Narayan’ and a paper, “Forward”. In the Congress Session of Gaya 
in 1922, the resolution of entering in the Legislative Assemblies was not accepted. 
Hence C.R. Das and Motital Nehru founded the Congress Khilafat Swaraj Party. Its 
aim was to enter the legislatures and fight the British Government form within and to 
win swaraj. They prepared themselves for the coming elections to be held in 1923.The  
swarajists very soon gained immense popularity. 
 

Gandhiji was released from prison in February 1923 due m ill health. He 
advised compromise between the two groups. Therefore, both groups reached an 
understanding. The Swarajists agreed to remain In the Congress and adhere to the 
principle of non-co-operation. A special session of the congress was held at Delhi in 
September, 1925- It accepted the resolution of entering In the Legislative Assemblies. 
Thus the Swaraj party/ In fact remained a party within the fold of the congress- The 
Swarajists desired to take the non-co-operation from streets to the Legislative 
Councils. In the election of 1923, the Swarajists gained tremendous success. At the 
Centre, the Swarajists captured 48 seats out of 145 seats in the Central Assembly. 
However, they could not force the Government to accept their demand by opposing 
the policies of the Government. Lord Reading; the then Governor-General of India 
offered a proposal for a Round Table Conference in order to draft the constitution of 
India. But his proposal was rejected. The Swarajist Party in Bengal forced two of his 
ministers to resign In Bengal and it refused to participate in the festival organised by 
the Governor-General and Governors. Many times, they staged a walk out to show 
resentment against the attitude of the Government. 
The Muddlman Committee was appointed in 1924 to report on the functioning 
of the reforms of 1919 by the Government. The majority of the members simply 
favoured some minor changes in the scheme while the minority of the members 
rejected it and suggested to propose a new scheme of reforms. The Government put up 
the report of the majority before the Assembly. The Swarajists criticized it bitterly and 
succeeded in passing an amendment to it. In 1924, the Swarajists accepted seats on the 
Steel Protection Committee. In 1925, Moti Lal Nehur accepted membership of the 
Skeen Committee. It was appointed to find out the possibility of indianizing the army, 
in the same year, V.J. Patel, member of the Swarajya Party was elected as the Speaker 
of the Central Assembly. The death of C.R. Das in 1925 weakened the Swaraj’ Party. 
In the election of 1926, the Swarajists lost heavily and the party lost its importance. 
Finally most of the Swarajists came back to the Congress-fold and it programme. The 
Swarajists, thus failed to gain something concrete. 
 

Simon Commission, 1927 
Section 84(a) of the Government of India Act, 1919 provided that the 
appointment of a Statutory commission at the expiry of ten years after passing the act 
of 1919. It enquired into the working of the system of government,, the growth of 
education and the development of representative institutions in British India and to 
report in what extent the responsible government would be established. But the 
Swarajists successfully impressed on the Government, the need for an early revision 
of the Act of 1919. In view of the pressure from the Swarajists, the Government 
decided to appoint a Royal-Commission In 1927, headed by Sir John Simon, airs 
eminent lawyer of England. The Simon Commission consisted of seven members of 
the British Parliament, with Sir John Simon as Its chairman. It was a White 
commission. Not a single Indian was included in it. The exclusion of the Indians from 
the commission was greatly resented by the Indian National Congress. Leaders of all 
Indian political parties decided to boycott the commission. When the commission 
landed in Bombay on February 7, 1928, it was greeted with a country-wide hartal. 
Wherever the commission went, it was welcomed with black flags and the slogans of 
“Go back Simon”. 
The Government tried to suppress the protest movement. Processions and the 
meetings of the people were banned. Lala Lajpat Raj at Lahore was mercilessly beaten 
by the police while leading a procession in Punjab and died after few weeks. His death 
was avenged by Sardar Bhagat Singh who shot down dead the police officer, Mr. 
Saunders who was responsible for lathi-blows on Laia Lajpat Raj. A bomb was 
thrown by Bhagat Singh and B.K. Datt in the Central Legislative Assembly on April 
8, 1929. Bhagat Singh was given death sentence; in U.P. leaders like Jawaharlal 
Nehru and Govind Bailabh Pant were beaten. Simon Commission visited India twice. 
To inquire into the working of the growth of education of India, a committee was 
formed under the Chairmanship of Mr.Hartog. The Committee gave its 
recommendations concerning the system of education in India. Simon Commission 
appointed another committee under the Chairmanship of Mr. Harcourt Butler, it 
reported on the relations of British India with native states. Simon Commission 

published its report on May, 1930. On the basis of the recommendations of it, the 
Government of India Act, 1935 was passed. 
The main recommendations of the commission were that Dyarchy would be 
abolished in the provinces and the entire provincial administration should be entrusted 
to ministers. However, the governors had to retain certain special powers. At the 
centre, It recommended the federal government Including In the native states. The 
Executive was to remain free from the central of the legislatures. The commission 
recommended that the franchise should be extended and the legislatures be enlarged, 
ft suggested the separation of Burma from India and Sindh from Bombay, it also 
suggested the Indian political parties should draw a constitution together. P.E. Roberts 
says, “The Report will stand out as one of the greatest of Indian State Papers”. 
Nehru Report, 1928 
The Indians condemned the appointment of Simon Commission. Hence Lord 
Birkenhead, the Secretary of State for India appealed the Indian leaders to draft a 
constitution of India acceptable to all. All parties’ conference met at Delhi in February 
and March, 1928 to discuss the question of a constitution for India on the basis of full 
responsible Government under the Chairmanship of Dr. M.A. Ansari. The conference 
consisted of the representative of all political parties, concerned organizatives and 
elected members of central and provincial legislatures. The conference appointed a 
small committee under the chairmanship of Motflal Nehur. Jawaharial Nehur was the 
Secretary of the Committee. The other members of the committee were Sir Imam Ali 
and Shahib Qureshi representing the Muslims, M.S. Aney and M.R. Jayakar 
representing the Hindhu Mahasabha, G.R. Pradhan representing the non-Brahmins, 
Sardar Mangala Singh representing die Sikhs, Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru representing the 
Liberal Party and N.N. Joshi representing the Labour party and Subhas Chandra Bose. 
The report submitted by the committee is known as the Nehur Report, ft was 
submitted on August 10, 1928. 
The Nehru report was presented to AH Parties Conference held at Lucknow 
from 28th to 31st August, 1928. The report proposed Dominion Status for India 

Responsible Governments were to be introduced both at the centre and the provinces. 
The Government at the Centre was to be a Federal one including those of the native 
states. The Parliament at the centre was to consist, of two houses while the provincial 
legislatures were to have single houses. Fundamental tights were to be incorporated. 
In the constitution. Joint electorates were proposed throughout India. A committee of 
defence was proposed at the centre. The conference was in favour of dominion status. 
Jawaharlal Nehur and Subash Chandra Bose expressed their unwillingness to accept 
the Dominion Status since their demand was complete independence. The Nehru 
Report by recommending joint electorates gave a rude shock to the hopes of the 
Muslims. They stood for separate electorates and complete independence. A part from 
the Muslims, some sections of the Sikhs, Christians and Depressed classes also did not 
fully approve the Nehru Report. The Congress however accepted the Nehru Report. In 
the Calcutta Session of the Congress in December, 1928, they decided that the Nehru 
Report should be placed before the British Government for its acceptance by 
December, 31, 1929. 
Jinnah’s Fourteen Points, 1929 
The Nehru Report was criticized by the Muslims on the ground that there was 
no provision for separate electorate. Therefore Jinnah put forward his Fourteen Points 
in the meeting of Ail India Muslim League in Delhi in March, 1929 as a minimum 
Muslim demand for any political settlement, Jinnah’s Fourteen Points were, future 
Constitution to be federal with residuary powers vested in the provinces and uniform 
measure of autonomy for all provinces. All legislatures to be constituted on the 
principle of adequate and effective representation of minorities in every province. 1/3 
representation to Muslims in Central Legislature. Representation of communal groups 
to be by separate electorates. Any territorial redistribution not to affect Muslim 
majority in the Punjab, Bengal and North West Frontier Province. All communities 
should be guaranteed complete religious freedom. No bill or resolution to be passed in 
any legislatures if 2/4 of members of a particular community object to such a bill or 
resolution. Sind to be separated from Bombay presidency. Reforms in NWF province 
and Baluchistan as in other provinces. Adequate share for Muslims in public services. 

Adequate safeguards for the protection of Muslim culture and for the promotion of 
Muslim education, language, and religion and Muslim charitable institutions. No 
cabinet with 1/3 Muslim ministers. No change in the constitution of the Central 
Legislature without the concurrence of the states continuing the India federation. The 
draft resolution incorporating these fourteen points was placed before the Muslim 
League session in Delhi In March, 1929. Jinnah in his Presidential address appealed to 
the various Muslim groups to take a “united decision” on the future constitution of the 
government of India. 
Lahore Session, 1929 
The Labour party headed by Ramsay Mac Donald comes to power in England. 
He invited the Viceroy, Lord Irwin to London for consulation. After returning to 
India, Lord Irwin issued a statement on 31st October, 1929. By that, he gave assurance 
of Dominion status. Mr. Churchill described Dominion Status for India “as a crime”. 
The Liberals also did not favour the proposal of granting Dominion Status to India. 
Since the Labour Party did not have absolute majority in the House of Commons, it 
dropped the idea of granting dominion status to India. Under these circumstances, the 
congress met In Lahore on 29th December 1929. Jawaharlal Nehur was elected its 
President. The Congress declared Pooma Swaraj as its goal at mid-night on December 
31, 1929 on the banks of the river Ravi, The Nehru Report was finally dropped by the 
Congress. 
It also decided to celebrate 26th January as Independence day every year. 
Nehru hoisted the tri-colour flag of Indian Independence. The Congress authorized 
Gandhiji to launch a programme of Civil disobedience, including non-payment of 
taxes with the ultimate object of attaining Pooma Swaraj or complete independence. A 
resolution was moved by Gandhiji. It demanded the reduction of land tax, impose 
custom duty on foreign cloth, release all political prisoners, abolition of salt tax and 
prohibition of the liquor. As the Government ignored the demands of the Congress, 
(Lord Irwin, the viceroy) Gandhiji stated Civil Disobedient Movement in 1930. 
 

UNIT IV 
CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE MOVEMENT - DANDI MARCH - ROUND 
TABLECONFERENCES - GANDHI -IRWINFACT 
Civil Disobedience Movement, 1930-1934 
Gandhiji read Thoreau’s essay on “‘Civil Disobedience” relating to his refusal 
to support the American Government because of slavery and Mexican war. It inspired 
Gandhiji to follow the civil Disobedience Movement in India. 
Dandhi March, 1930 
Gandhiji started Civil Disobedience Movement in 1930 by violating salt tax. 
Tax was levied on salt and the British Government banned the production of salt by 
individuals. On March 12, 1930 Gandhiji started from Sabarmati Ashram in 
Ahamadabad. Seventy-eight followers accompanied him to the sea coast at Dandi, a 
distance of 241 miles in twenty-four days. All along the way people flocked in 
thousands to seek the blessings of Gandhiji. On the way, Gandhiji preached the 
message of non-violence and non-cooperation. Gandhiji reached Dandi on 5th April. 
The next day, he made salt from sea water as a symbolic act of law-breaking. 
The march came to be known as Dandi March. Gandhiji described his march as “the 
war against the Salt Tax”. Subhash Bose compared the Salt March to Napoleon’s 
March to Paris on his return from Elba. Motital Nehru compared it to the historic 
march of Ram Chandra to Lanka. Mr. Bralisford, an English journalist described the 
Dandi March as “the kindergarten state of revolution” and ridiculed the idea that, “the 
king Emperor can be unseated by boiling sea water in a kettle”. 
Gandhiji called upon the people to celebrate the week from 6th April to 13th 
April as the National Week and defy the salt laws and picket liquor shops, opium dens 
and foreign cloth dealers’ shops. He also appealed to the people to leave the 
Government schools, colleges and services. The movement to break the laws of the 
government spread rapidly. Lakhs of Indians were involved in it. Mostly the activities 
of the Satyagrahis were processions, holding of meeting, picketing, boycotting of 

foreign goods, distributing leaflets among the people, saluting the congress-flag, with-
holding of land revenue, manufacturing of salt, celebrating national weeks and special 
‘days’ like the “All India Prisoner’s Day and Peshawar Day. Women joined the 
movement in large numbers. All of them were arrested and Imprisoned, in the North-
West Frontier Province, agitation was carded on by Khan Abdul’ Gaffar Khan, leader 
of the Red Shirt Movement, (better known as Frontier Gandhi) 
Satyagrahis under the leadership of Sarojini Devi attacked the salt godown at 
Dharasana. She held protest-marches everywhere and produced salt without paying 
tax. In Tamil fMadu, Salt Satyagraha was launched by Rajafi. Hs undertook his 
famous Vedaranyam .March from Trichi on March 13, 1930. Boycott of foreign 
textiles was also started on a large scale, many people were wounded and some of 
them died due to lathi-blows by the police. Sixteen English owned textile mills at 
Bombay had to be closed. It proved a blessing in disguise to Indian mills. The 
peasants also carried out no-tax campaign with great zeal. Muslims did not take part in 
die Civil Disobedience Movement. Jinrsah said, “This movement is not a movement 
for complete independence of India, but for making the 70 million Muslims of India 
dependent of Hindu Mahasabha” But the nationalist Muslim leaders like Khan Abdul 
Ghaffar Khan, Maulana Azad and a few others offered full cooperation and suffered at 
the hands of the government. 
The government followed a policy of repression to suppress the movement. 
The Government resorted to emergency ordinances. The Congress was declared as 
illegal body. The Press Act of 1910 was strictly enforced and many restrictions were 
placed on newspapers. Section 144 of the Indian Criminal Procedure Code was 
promulgated. The measures adopted by the Government to suppress the movement 
included arrest and imprisonment of leaders, brutal lathy charges and firings in 
dispersing processions and meetings, confiscation of lands, cattle, utensils and 
personal belonging, -ill-treatment of women and children, censorship of £ne press, 
imprisonment without trials, prohibition of meetings and processions and destruction 
of property. Gandhiji was arrested on May 5, 1930 and Imprisoned in Yervada jail. 
Hundreds of people were killed and 60,000 people were imprisoned. 

First Round Table Conference, 1930 
The British Government realized that a policy of repression would not succeed 
In the long run and so something must be done to win over the Congress. Lord Irwin 
appealed to the people of India for co-operation. The British Government decided to 
call the First Round table Conference to discuss future constitutional reforms. The 
Round Table Conference was convened by the British Prime Minister, Ramsay 
Macdonald in London from 12th November, 1930 to 19th January, 1931 to deliberate 
on the Simon Commission Report and the Indian problem. The First Round Table 
Conference was inaugurated by the king of England on November 12, 1930. Ramsay 
Macdonald presided over the conference. Eighty-nine delegates of India attended the 
conference. Out of it, 57 represented the British India, 16 represented the Indian 
Princely States and the rest 16 represented from the British political parties. The 
representatives of India were Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Harijans, Landlords and 
workers. The prominent Indian leaders were Tej Bahadur Sapru, V.S. Srinivasa Sastri, 
C.Y. Chintamani and B.R. Ambedkar. The Congress could not be represented since all 
its leaders were in jail. 
Prime Minister Macdonald suggested some principles for discussions in the 
conference. Firstly, a federation was proposed for India. Secondly, provinces were to 
be given full responsible government with necessary safeguards. Thirdly, partial 
responsible government with necessary safeguards. Fourthly, partial responsible 
government was to be introduced at the centre subject to certain reservations. The 
federal principle, granting of Provincial Autonomy to the provinces and the idea of 
introducing partial responsibility at the centre also were commanded and welcomed. 
The communal issue was subjected to a Sort of discussions and difference of opinion. 
The Muslims stood for separate electorates. The Hindu delegates advocated Joint 
Electorates with reservation of seats for the minorities. The conference was adjourned 
on 19th January. 1931 as the details of a scheme of federation could not be worked out 
on account of the extravagant safeguards demanded by the minorities. At the end of 
the conference, the Prime Minister in his Valedictory address, he expressed hope that 
the Congress would abandon civil disobedience and in future to participate in the 

deliberations of the conference and help in framing the Indian Constitution. Sahni has 
rightly remarked, “With Gandhiji and the congress absent, it was like staging Hamlet 
without the Prince of Denmark”. Subhash Chandra Bose remarked that the conference 
offered India, “two bitter pills ..... Safeguards and Federation. To make the pills 
eatable,, they were sugar-coated with responsibility”. 
Gandhi-twin Pact 1931 
The Civil Disobedience Movement was going on almost all over the country. 
The boycott of British goods was in full swing and terroristic activities were rampant 
in Bengal and the North West Frontier Province, No-tax campaign was going on 
strongly in Gujarat, the United Provinces and parts of Bengal. The only way to ease 
the situation and to enable the congress to participate in the Second Round Table 
Conference was to get the support and goodwill of the congress. Hence Lord Irwin, 
the Viceroy lifted the ban on the Congress on 26th January, 1931 and ordered an 
unconditional release of its members. 
Lord Irwin negotiated with Gandhifi for fifteen days to discuss political 
situation and both of them arrived at an understanding and concluded at Delhi the 
famous Gandhi-Irwin Pact or Delhi Pact in 5th March, 1931. By this pact, the 
Government agreed to withdraw all ordinances promulgated in connection with the 
Civil Disobedience Movement, to release prisoners who were imprisoned in 
connection with that movement except those who were guilty of violence, to restore 
the confiscated property of the Satyagrahis, to permit peaceful picketing of liquor, 
opium and foreign cloth shops and to permit people living within a certain distance of 
the sea shore to collect or manufacture salt free of duty. The Congress, on the 
otherhand agreed to suspend Civil Disobedience Movement, to stop boycott and to 
participate In the Second Round Table Conference for drafting a constitution on the 
basis of a) Federation, b) Responsibility and c) Safeguards or reservations in the 
interest of India for such matters as defence, external affairs, minorities and the 
finance of India. The congress approved the Gandhi-lrwin Pact held at Karachi in 
March, 1931. Gandhiji was deputed to be sole. Representative of the Congress to 

participate in the Second Round Table Conference. 
Second Round Table Conference 1931 
Even before the ink was dry on the Gandhi-Irwin Pact, the spirit in which it 
was signed began to disappear. The Government executed Sardar Bhagat Singh, Sukh 
Dev and Raj Guru on 23rd March in connection with the Lahore conspiracy case. This 
created a lot of agitation In the country. Before convening the Second Round Table 
Conference, a very significant change occurred In British political scene. Labor 
Government headed by Ramsay Macdonald was tumbled down. A National 
Government constituted by a coalition between the Liberals and Conservative parties. 
Sir Samuel Hoare, a staunch conservative, replaced Mr. Wedgwood Bern as the 
Secretary of State for India. Lord Irwin was replaced by Lord Willington in April 
1931 as the Viceroy of India. These changes in the British leadership gave a great 
setback to Gandhi-Irwin pact. Hence an interview between the Viceroy, Lord 
Willington and Gandhiji was arranged at Simla. It resulted in a mutual understanding 
between the two. Gandhiji agreed to attend the Second Round Table Conferences as 
the sole representative of the Congress. 
The Second Round Table Conference began in London In 7th September, 1931 
and lasted for three months. Mahatma Gandhiji participated in it as a sole 
representative of the congress. Mrs. Sarojini Naidu and Pandit Madan Mohan 
Malaviya also attended the conference in their Individual capacities Sarojini Naidu 
presented a memorandum to Montague, the British of State for India. She insisted 
votes for women and sufficient help for health and place for education. Her poems 
attracted the attention of learned men. Her love for the country and tender feelings for 
all beautiful things were passionately expressed in these poems, she married Dr. Naidu 
of Madras. She began to travel all over India to talk on the need for the social freedom 
of women. She spoke vehemently against the evil practices of child marriage and 
oppression of women. In 1914, she met Mahatma Gandhiji in London. He drew her 
into the main stream of the struggle for freedom. She began to attend the meetings of 
the Indian National Congress. She spoke in the Khilaft Committee meeting and 

condemned the Jallian Wala Bagh Massacre in that meeting. She led a party of men 
and women to Dandi where Gandhijl launched his salt satyagraha. She went ‘to Jail 
for several times. She nursed Gandhijl Whenever he fasted for the country. She was 
the first woman to hold the distinguished post of the Governor of  Uttrapradesh in free 
India. 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya joined the congress in 1886. He was a great 
Parliamentarian Due to his efforts, Indian Industrial Conference was held at Benaras 
in I905 and the meeting of U.P. Industrial Association was convened at Allahabad In 
1907. He was also responsible for starting the Prayag Sugar Company. He wm elected 
die President of the Indian National congress twice in 1909 and 1918. He was keenly 
interested in the industrial advancement of India. He was a member of the Swarajist 
Party. But he left the same and started a new party called the Nationalist Party when 
he found that the congress was not safeguarding interests of the Hindus. His greatest 
contribution was the Banaras Hindu University. For several years, he edited papers 
like, ‘Hindustan’ and ‘Indian Union’. He started the Hindi weekly entitled 
‘Abhyudaya’. He was also responsible for bringing the ‘Leader’, English dally from 
Allahabad. 
Gandhiji had spoken in the Second Round Table conference. He requested to 
give franchise for the adult, to establish a supreme court, conducting elections and 
autonomy to the Indians. The British government made an offer of “partly 
responsible’ Government at the Centre. But it could not solve the communal problem. 
At last, a solution to this problem was left to the discretion of Mr. Ramsay 
Macdonaid, Prime Minister of England. Gandhlji returned to India empty-handed and 
much disappointed in 1932 A.D. He was pained to find the changed attitude of the 
Government. During Gandhiji’s absence from India, Gandhi Irwin Pact was violated 
under the guidance of Lord Wellington. The rule of Governor General’s ordinances 
had commenced in Bengal, North-West Frontier Province and U.P. Leaders like Khan 
Abdul Ghaffar Khan and Pt. Jawaharlal Nehur were arrested. Hence, Gandhiji revived 
the Civil Disobedience Movement. Gandhlji and Patel were arrested on January 4th, 

1932. This was followed by more arrests of the congress, leaders. Over one lakh 
people were arrested and imprisoned. The Congress Party was declared unlawful. Its 
offices were raided and its records were seized. 
Communal Award, 1932 A.D. 
The two sessions of the Round Table Conference failed to resolve the 
communal problem. Ramsay Macdonald, British Prime Minister announced 
Communal Award on 16th August, 1932. He fixed seats for various communities in 
the provincial legislatures. Separate electorates were decided upon and the depressed 
classes were given separate representation. Indian Christians and Anglo-Indians were 
also given the right of separate electorates. Special seats were allotted to labor, 
commerce, mining and planters to be filled in by their respective associations. Seats 
allotted to landholders to be filled by the landlord’s constituency. Majority of the 
Hindus and Sikhs were greatly disappointed by this award. Moreover, it tried to 
weaken the national unity by creating separate electorates. It widened the existing gulf 
between the various communities. 
Poona Pact 1932 
Gandhiji was in yervada jail in Poona when the Award was announced. The 
separate representation to the depressed classes isolating them from the caste Hindus 
was resented by Gandhiji. He warned the Government to reconsider its decision. But 
nobody paid any heed to it. To oppose this, Gandhiji undertook a fast unto dealth on 
20th September, 1932. When Gandhiji’s condition deteriorated, some prominent 
leaders like Rajagopalachari, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, Pandit Malaviya, M.C. Rajah and 
Dr. Ambedkar met Gandhiji at Poona for about six days. As a result of their sincere 
efforts, a compromise formula was evolved. It was accepted by both Gandhiji and 
Ambedkar. The formula popularly termed as Poona Pact was accepted by the British 
Government also. 
Ambedkar was affectionately known as Babasaheb. Ambedkar was a law 
minister in India’s first cabinet and Chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Indian 

constitution. He worked hard for the welfare of the untouchables. For the welfare of 
the untouchables, Ambedkar started a Marathi fortnightly, the Bahishkrit Bharat in 
April., 192 7 and a weekly, the Janata hi November, 1930 in September, 1927s he 
started the Samaj Samata Sangh for reaching social equality, Intercast marriage and 
intercaste dinner formed an important parts of the programme of the organisation. In 
December, 1927, he held 3 Satyagraha to establish the Civil Right of the untouchables 
to draw water from a public tank; “Chavdar Tafen” at Mahad, The Hindus claimed the 
tank as a private property. Ambedkar won the case in Bombay High Court in March, 
1937. He launched another Satyagraha to establish the right of the untouchables to 
enter the famous temple of Kalaram at Nasik in March 1930. After a series of 
unsuccessful temple satyagrahas, Ambedkar announced on 13th October at Yeola 
(Nasik), he “would not die a Hindu”. Only two months before his death, on 14th 
October, 1956, Ambedkar converted to Buddhism at a mass meeting in Nagpur. He 
himself gave Deeksha to lakhs of followers. Ambedkar wrote many books ‘Castes in 
India’ (1916) ‘the problem of the Rupee’ (1923). “Evolution of Provincial Finance in 
British India” (1927), ‘Thoughts on Pakistan’ (1941), “Ranade, Gandhiji and Jinnah” 
(1943) and “Thoughts on Linguistic States” (1955). 
By the Poona Pact, the Depressed Classes (Harijans as called by Gandhiji) 
were given more seats than provided in the Communal Award. 148 seats were 
reserved for them in the Provincial Legislature as against71 seats provided to them by 
the Communal Award. The election of these seats was to be conducted in two stages. 
In the first stage, the schedule caste voters were to elect four candidates for each seat 
reserved for Diem. In the second stage, both die Hindus and die Harijans were to vote 
jointly and elect one candidate out of these four persons. In addition to this, the 
Harijans were given additional vote in the election of candidates from general seats. 
Thus, the Poona Pact managed to retain Joint Electorates for the Scheduled castes 
along with their Hindu brethrens. This agreement was termed as Poona Pact, it was 
adopted on September 26, 1932 and on the same day Gandhiji gave up his fast (21 
days), it gave great impetus to the movement for the eradication of untouchabitity. It 
prevented a political breach between the so called, “Caste Hindus and their Scheduled 

Caste Hindus”. 
Third Round Table Conference, 1932 
The Third Round Table Conference was held In London from 17th November 
to December 24th, 1932. Sir Samuel Hoare, Secretary of State for India convened the 
Third Round Table conference. The congress boycotted it. Only persons loyal to the 
Government were invited to it. It merely considered die reports of the various sub-
committees set up for the Second Round Table Conference and reaffirmed the 
decisions arrived at by these sub-committees. In 1933, the Government published a 
White Paper embodying the conclusions of the conferences. It later on formed die 
nucleus of the Government of India Act, 1935. Gandhi was released and he advised 
the congress to suspend the Civil Disobedience Movement for six weeks. He also 
asked the Government to release immediately all the political prisoners. But the 
Government did not release the political prisoners. Therefore, Gandhiji decided to 
start Individual Satyagraha on 24th July, 1933. But he was again arrested and sent to 
Yervada jail. On account of his ill-health, Gandhiji was released from jail on 23 rd 
August 1933. He then devoted his time for the uplift of the depressed people whom he 
called the “Harijians”, the children of God. Gandhji stopped the Civil Disobedience 
Movement in April, 1934. This movement awakened the political consciousness 
among the Indian masses and it enabled them to take an active part in the struggle for 
freedom in large numbers. This movement lowered the prestige of British rule in India 
in the eyes of the world. 
The Government of India Act, 1935 
The report of the Simon Commission and the proposals of die three Round 
Table Conferences formed the basis for the Government of India Act of 1935. This 
Act introduced Provincial autonomy and abolished dyarchy in the provinces. It made 
the ministers responsible to the legislatures and established a federal Government at 
the centre. Yet, neither at the centre nor in the provinces was complete responsible 
government introduced. The Viceroy and the governors were assigned “special 
responsibilities” to act in their own discretion and to make ordinances. Thus they have 

the power to act against the wishes of Indian ministers. “Adult Franchise” was not 
introduced. Only 14% of the total ‘population of India was given the right to vote. The 
Federal part of the Act was never introduced because the native rulers refused to Join 
it. The Act of 1935 was far away from the demand of the Congress for Dominion 
Status and St condemned It as “totally disappointing”. Yet the congress decided to 
participate in the ensuring elections arranged according to the provisions of the Act. 
Viceroy Linlithgow succeeded after Willington in 1936. 
New Ministries 1935-1939 
The elections to provincial legislative assemblies and in some provinces for the 
councils (upper houses) also however took place in 1937. The elections mostly went 
in favour of the Congress. It obtained clear majorities in eight out of eleven provinces 
in United Provinces Madras, Bihar, Orissa, Bombay, Assam, Central Provinces and 
North-West Frontier Provinces and they formed their own governments. The Muslim 
League formed ministry in Bengal and Sindh. A coalition Government was formed in 
Punjab (unionists, Muslims, the Hindus and the Sikhs). The congress Ministries did 
some commendable work relating to primary education, prohibition of liquors, cottage 
industries, improvement of the villages and the peasants and entering into temples by 
the Harijans. The Muslim League demanded that its elected representatives should be 
admitted in all provincial ministries and the Congress refused to admit any Muslim 
League into its ministry unless Muslim League conformed to congress principles. This 
widened the gulf between the Congress and the Muslim League. 
A left wing developed within the Congress under the leadership of Subhas 
Chandra Bose. He defeated even a nominee of Mahatma Gandhi in the election to the 
Presidentship of the Congress. When Subhas Chandra Bose was forced to resign by 
the Moderates, he left the congress and formed his own party, the Forward Bloc in 
1938. The Second World War broke out in 1939. British Government involved India 
in the war without consulting the Indians. The Viceroy assumed emergency powers 
under the Defence of India Rules. Hence, the congress to show their protest resigned 
their ministries in eight provinces, 

Lahore Session, 1940 
The Muslim League and its leader Mohammad Ail Jinnah occupied an 
important place In Indian public life from 1937 onwards. When the Congress 
Ministries resigned in 1939, he declared that the end of Congress rule in the provinces 
should be celebrated on 22nd December, 1939 as a ‘Day of Deliverance every year. 
Soon after the introduction of provincial Autonomy, jinnah began to preach the theory 
that the Indian Muslims were a ‘nation’ not a mere community. In an article published 
in an English journal ‘Time and Tide” (London) in January, 1940, he observed that 
“There are two nations in India which must share the governance of their common 
motherland”. In the Presidential address at the Lahore session of the Muslim League 
held in March 24, 1940, Jinnah emphasized the differences between Hinduism and 
Islam and proclaimed that the division of India into two autonomous Sates was the 
only solution to the Indian problem. The session passed one resolution, demanding 
Pakistan as a separate homeland for the entire Muslim community. The area claimed 
by the League for Pakistan was to consist of Sind, Baluchistan, the Punjab, NWFP 
(North-West Frontier Province), Delhi Province, some districts in U.P., Bengal, 
Assam, Hyderabad Deccan, Kashmir and a few districts in Madras. The idea of a 
separate state was not a discovery of jinnah. In 1930, Sri Muhammad Iqbal, the poet-
philosopher of the Punjab made a proposal for the amalgamation of the Punjab, the 
NWFP, Sind and Baluchistan in a single autonomous, but not independent state. In 
1933, Chaudhuri Rahmat All, a Punjabi student coined the word, ‘Pakistan’ (“Land of 
the Pure’) Pakistan was to be a Muslim State consisting of the Punjab (indicated by 
‘P’), the NWFP or the Afghan  territory (indicated by ‘A’), Kashmir (indicated by 
‘K’), Sind (indicated by ‘S’) and Baluchistan (indicated by ‘stan’). In 1940, Chaudhuri 
Rahmat Ail claimed Assam and Hyderabad as integral parts of Pakistan. 
August Declaration and individual Satyagraha, 1940 
The Muslim League adopted anti-Hindu attitude and advocated partition. 
Hence die Hindu Mahasabha In its session at Lucknow (July 1940) under the 
Presidentship of M.S. Aney, opposed partition and wanted Hindu predominance In the 

armed forces. The Congress opposed all thinking on communal lines. The 
Conservative Party, headed by Winston Churchill came in to power In Britain. He was 
not prepared to relax British control over India. Under such circumstances, the 
Viceroy, Lord Linlithgow announced the famous, ‘August Offer’ in August,  1940, 
proposing the expansion of the Viceroy’s Executive Council to constitute it as a War 
Advisory Council for the purpose of associating twenty or more Indians in the task of 
the prosecution of the Second World War and to get the support of the Indians in the 
War. “August Offer” promised, to set up a body of representatives of Indian people to 
frame  a new constitution for India after the war. The congress rejected the ‘August 
offer’ as unsatisfactory. The Muslim League rejected the offer. It stood against the 
Idea of a united India as implied in the Viceroy’s statement. 
Mahatma Gandhiji started a campaign of Individual Satyagraha is October, 
1940 to avoid the confusion and bloodshed involved in a mass civil Disobedience 
Movement. Acharya Vinoba Bhave, a trusted disciple of Gandhiji was selected as the 
first individual Satyagrahi. He inaugurated the campaign at Paunar on 17th October. 
The reason was the Congress demand for a National Government was rejected and the 
freedom of speech against the war effort was denied. Pandit Nehru followed him. 
Soon there was a nationwide movement of Individual Satyagraha. Achariya Vinoba 
Bhave started the Boodhan Movement. ‘Bhoodan’ is formed of two words, Bhoomi 
(Ian) and Dan (donation). In otherwords, Bhoodan is the voluntary contribution of 
land from the ‘haves’ to have-nots’. He collected the free lands from the rich people 
and distributed among poor. He covered most of the cities in India by walking. His 
disciple was Jeyapragash Narayan. 
 
The Government felt that a fair offer was rejected by the Indians and took 
repressive measures. Newspapers which published news of the movement were 
suppressed and a large number of congressmen including ex-ministers were up in 
prison. Jawaharial Nehru was sentenced to four-year term for his speeches. On 7th 
November, a research student at the Gandhiji Ashram Brahm Dutt Nirmal offered 
Satyagraha. About 25,000 Indians were arrested and imprisoned. The movement was a 
simple protest against the way the war being fought on behalf of India. Though the 

movement was non-violent, yet it caused great embarrassment to the government. The 
Individual Satyagraha continued up to December, 1941. 
Expansion of Viceroy’s Council 1941 
In the midst of the Individual Civil Disobedience Movement, the Viceroy 
expanded his Executive Council in November, 1941. He appointed five Indians who 
were non-party men as additional members of his Executive Council. Thus out of 
thirteen, eight of its members were to be Indians. The Viceroy set up War Advisory 
Council, consisting of 30 members within the terms of ‘August Offer”. The 
departments of vital importance like Defense. Home and Finance were however kept 
with the British members. Neither the Congress nor the Muslim League agreed to send 
their representatives to these councils. On December 7, 1941, Japan entered the 
Second World war against the allies and posed immediate danger not only to South-
East-Asia but to India as well. The Indian government started releasing the 
Satyagrahls. The Congress on its behalf suspended the Satyagraha movement in 
December, 1941. But it insisted not to co-operate with the Government unless India 
was assured of independence after the Second World War. 
Cripps Mission, 1942 
The British policy towards India underwent a change following quick victories 
by ‘Japan in South East Asia and its capture of Burma. Japan occupied Singapore on 
15th February. It disturbed U.S.A., the chief ally of Britain. Its President, Mr. 
Roosevelt put pressure on Winston Churchill to come to some settlement with Indian 
leaders. The capture of Rangoon by Japan on 7th, March, 1942 forced Winston 
Churchill to send Cripps. Mission on March 11th to India to get the support of the 
Indians. Cripps Mission was headed by Sir Stafford Cripps. He was a member of die 
War Cabinet and leader of the House of Commons. He was well-versed in Indian 
politics and had close relations with Gandhiji and Nehru. The Cripp’s Mission reached 
Delhi on March 23, 1942. Soon he met viceroy members of Executive Council, other 
official advisers and held discussions. With the leaders of Congress, Muslim League, 
Hindu Mahasabha representatives of the Princes, Nationalist Muslims and other 

political parties, Jinnah and Sir Ffroz Khan Noon, a member of Viceroy’s Execute 
Council sent notes to Mr. Cripps stating that the demand for Pakistan must be 
accepted. If Britain did anything to sacrifice the interests of Muslim’s In India, great 
harm would be done to its war efforts. After his discussions, Cripps made few 
proposals on behalf of the British Government. 
Cripp’s Missions announced his proposals on 29th March, 1942. He also 
appealed to the people of India to accept these proposals. India would be granted 
Dominion Status and the right to secede from the British. Commonwealth of Nations. 
After the war, a Constituent Assembly would be formed to draw up a constitution. 
Any native state or province which, did not agree with the new constitution would be 
free to secede from the Indian Union and form its own government. Except the 
Defence Department, all other departments were to be entrusted to the Indians, The 
Indian leaders were invited to co-operate in the war effort of the government. The 
Congress demanded the immediate replacement of the Viceroy’s Council by a Cabinet 
responsible to the legislature. The Government did not accept this. Hence it rejected 
the Cripps proposals Gandhiji called the Cripps, plan “a post-dated cheque on a 
crushing Bank” The Muslim League rejected it because its demanded of Pakistan was 
not clearly accepted in the Cripps’ plan. The Hindu Mahasabha, the Sikhs and the 
Liberals also had rejected the proposals. Cripps Mission was thus a failure. Cripp’s 
left India on 12th April, 1942. 

UNIT V 
QUIT INDIA MOVEMENT - INDIAN NATIONAL ARMY – WAVELL PLAN - 
MOUNT BATTEN PLAN - DAWN OF INDIAN INDEPENDENCE 
The Quit India Movement or the Revolt of 1942 
The failure of the Cripps’ Mission greatly widened the gulf between the 
Government and the Congress. The congress insisted for the transfer of power in the 
hands of Indians. Soon after- the departure of Sir Stafford Cripps, the ‘Quit India’ idea 
occurred to Mahatnia Gandhi. On May 10, 1942, he wrote in the Harijan magazine, 
“The presence of the British inIndia is an invitation to Japan to invade India. Their 
withdrawal removes sat bait ... The Congress Working Committee met at Wardba in 
July nd demanded the immediate withdrawal of the British from. India. The Ail India 
Congress Committee ratified this ‘Quit India” resolution at its meeting at Bombay on 
August 8, 1942, The “Quit India” resolution stated that w immediate end of the British 
rule In India Is an urgent necessity both for the sake of India and for the united nation. 
Gandhiji proclaimed. Every British civil servant, every one of the British Armed 
Forces and every other British officer necessarily must get out of India”. Quit India 
Movement or August Revolution slogan was Do or Die. The Muslim League raised 
die slogan of “Divide and Quit”. 
On 9th August, 1942, Mahatma Gandhi, the members of the Congress Working 
Committee and some other Congress leaders were arrested. The All India Congress 
Committee and the Provincial Congress Committees were banned. Lord Linlithgow, 
the then Viceroy of India followed the policy of repression all over India. The sudden 
arrest of the Congress leaders left the people leaderless. Gandhiji was held captive in 
the Aga Khan’s palace at Poona along with Kasturibai, Mahadev Bhai Desai and 
others. This action resulted in violent outburst in many parts of the country and the 
government property were gready damaged. According to official statements, 250 
Railway stations, 500 Post Offices were damaged and 150 Police Stations were 
attacked. Some officials and soldiers were killed and over 900 civilians lost their lives. 
All over the country, there were hartals and strikes in factories, schools, colleges and 

public demonstrations. They cut off telegraph, telephone wire and railway lines. They 
also burnt the government buildings. Immediately the government used all its 
machinery to suppress the movement. About 60,000 people were arrested all over the 
country. There were mob violence, lawlessness, riots and disorder in certain places. 
Gandhip undertook a fast on February 10, 1943 in jail and broke it at the end of the 
three weeks. (21 days). Kasturibai died in Jall in February, 1944. Gandhiji suffered 
from Malaria. 
Lord Wavell, the viceroy feared that Gandhiji would not survive. Hence be 
released him from the jail on May 6, 1944. The battle for the freedom of India was 
carried on beyond its frontiers by Subhash Chandra Bose, leader of the Indian 
National Army. 
Indian National Army, 1943 
Subhash Chandra Bose, popularly addressed as ‘Netaji’ or leader was a true 
patriot. Early in life, he was greatly influenced by the teachings of Ramakrishna and 
Vivekananda and later Aurobindo. Bose was born in 1897 at Cuttack in Orissa. His 
father was a lawyer by profession. Bose studied philosophy in the Presidency College 
at Calcutta. He went to Cambridge in England for higher education and passed the 
Indian Civil Service Examination in 1920. He did not like to serve die British people 
and so he resigned his Government post. After his return in 1920, Bose joined the 
Indian National Movement. He took active part in the movement regarding the 
boycott of die Prince of Wales. Due to terrorist activity, he was arrested and 
imprisoned in Mandalay prison in Burma. Bose rejected Dominion Status for India 
(Self-Government under die control of British) and was in favour of .complete 
independence. He was arrested in 1930 during the Civil Disobedience Movement, in 
1938; Bose was made the president of the Congress at Haripura. He was re-elected the 
President of the Congress in 1939 even against the wishes of Gandhiji. 
 
Subash Chandra Bose founded the Forward Bloc In 1938 within the Congress 

Party. He took part in die movement regarding the removal of Havell Statue of 
Calcutta. After die outbreak of die Second Worid War, Bose toured India and 
encouraged die people to drive away die British out of die country. He was taken into 
custody by die government. Due to ill-health, he was put into house arrest. He escaped 
to Russia in January, 1941 in the guise of a Pathan through NWFP and Afghanistan 
and then reached Germany. There Ribbentrop, the right hand man of Hitler welcomed 
him. Bose was allowed to broadcast anti-British propaganda from Berlin and raise 
‘Free India’ units from Indian prisoners of war in Germany. Then he made contacts 
with Japan. 
Bose became the leader of Indian prisoners captured and released by the 
Japanese in the Malay Peninsula. He organized them Into the Indian National Army of 
about twenty thousand Indians better known as Azad Hind Fauj in 1943 A.D. This 
army was a source of inspiration to the masses in India, its slogan was “Jai Hind” 
(Victor/ for India) which echoed throughout India. Bose established a Provisional 
Government of Free India known as Azad Hind at Singapore In 1943. Within a few 
days Japan, Germany, Italy, Croatia, Burma, Thailand, Nationalist. China, the 
Philippines and Manchuria recognized the Provisional government of free India, Japan 
handed over the Andaman and Nicobar Islands to this provisional government of free 
India on 7th November, 1943. Netaji hoisted the tricolour flag in Andaman as “a sign 
of Indian Sndepence. The soldiers of Indian National Army fought valiantly in Burma 
against the British on January 7, 1944. In the beginning, Azad Hind Army achieved 
considerable success, but on account of the beginning of rains, the British army 
defeated them. Now the Azad Hind Army reached Kohima and surrounded Impahl in 
Assam for four months. But from there, they had to withdraw. In the mean time, Japan 
met reverses In South-East Asia. The soldiers and the officers of Indian National 
Army were forced to surrender and afterwards put on trial by the British Court 
Martial. In 1945, Bose started re-organising his army in Bangkok and Singapore. On 
August 18, 1945 Bose died in an air crash in Siam on the way to Tokyo. Thus 
Subhash Chandra Bose and Azad Hind Army played a historic part in the Indian 
National Movement. 

Rajagopalachari Formula, 1944 
Mr. Jinnah insisted on the division of India and the creation of a sovereign 
Muslim State. Hence Mr. C. Rajagopalachari, the veteran Congress leader of Madras, 
evolved a formula for Congress-League cooperation on the basis of Pakistan. The 
Formula suggested that the Muslim League should endorse the Congress demand for 
independence and co-operate with it in the formation of Provisional Interim 
Government for the transitional period. After the close of the war, a commission 
should be appointed to demarcate the boundaries of the Muslim dominated districts In 
the North-West and East of India. The people of these districts, by plebiscite would 
decide whether they should form a separate State or not. In the event of separation, 
agreements w©i4fd be made for defence, communications and other essential matters. 
These terms shall be binding only in case of transfer of power by Britain to Indian 
leaders. Gandhijl approached Mr. Jinnah for a settlement on’ the basis of this formula 
after his release from Jail on May 6, 1944. Mr. Jinnah refected this offer, He refused 
to allow the non-Muslim inhabitants of the Muslim-majority areas to take part: In the 
proposed plebiscite; the right of self-determination. He also refused to provide for 
faint control over subjects like defence, communications and other essential matters. 
Wavell Plan, 1945 
Sir.Archibald Wavell became the Viceroy on 18th October, 1943 after Lord 
Linlithgow. He had already played a very prominent part not only as Commander-in-
Chief of India but also as a negotiator when Cripps Mission visited India. He placed a 
new solution before Indian leaders which is popularly known as ‘Wavell Plan’. The 
main feature of the plan was to form an interim government at the centre with equal 
representation to Caste-Hindus and the Muslims. Except the Viceroy and the 
Commander-in-Chief, all the members of the Executive Council were to be Indians. 
All portfolios, except Defence were to be transferred to die Indians. The Executive 
Council was to work under the frame work of the Act of 1935 till a new constitution 
was framed. The Executive Councillors were to be responsible to the Viceroy and not 
to the legislature. The plan also implied the appointment of a British High 

Commissioner in India. He had to look after the British commercial and other interests 
in India. 
Simla Conference, 1945 
The members of the Congress Working Committee were released on June 16, 
1945 and a conference of leaders was held at Simla on 29th June, 1945 to select the 
members for the Viceroy’s Executive Council. The Congress, the Muslim League, the 
Sikhs, the Scheduled castes, Europeans and the Unionist Party of Punjab were invited 
to attend the conference. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad was the President of the 
Congress that time. Maulana Adul Kalam Azad entered politics at the age of 20 and 
started art Urdu weekly known 3s the Ai Hilai in 1912. He worked zealously during 
the Non-co-operation Movement and he was arrested. When there was a conflict 
between the pro-changers and no-changers over the question of Council-entry, Azad 
brought about a compromise between these groups, by saying that both of them were 
to fight for India’s freedom. He was elected as the President of the congress -many 
times, during the period of Second World War, he was the President of the congress. 
He negotiated with the Cripps Mission. He joined as a Minister Education in the 
Interim Government. He was one of the finest interpreters of the Koran. His famous 
book was ‘India Wins Freedom”. No agreement was found possible regarding the 
composition of the Executive council. The Congress desired to nominate one Muslims 
on its behalf to the Executive council. But Mr.Jinnah demanded that all the Muslim 
members of the Council must be nominated by the Muslim League. The congress did 
not accept this and so Lord Wavell announced the failure of the conference onJuly, 14. 
Cabinet Mission, 1946 
The news of Indians struggle for freedom was spread all over the world. 
America, Russia and allies of Britain urged Britain to leave India. In the mean time, 
the general elections were held in England in August, 1945. The Coalition War 
Ministry of Churchill was succeeded by the Labor Ministry of Clement Attlee. The 
new British Prime Minister was in favour of giving India independence at the earliest. 
The General Elections in India gave an overwhelming majority to the Congress. In 

April, 1946, Congress formed Ministries in all the provinces having Hindu majority 
and North Western Frontier provinces. The Muslim League formed Ministry in 
Bengal 
and 
Sindh. 
In 
Punjab, 
a 
joint 
Ministry 
of 
the 
Congress, Akalis and” the Unionists was formed. 
On March 15, 1946, the British government announced to depute a Cabinet 
Mission to India. The Mission consisting of three cabinet members, Lord Pethick 
Lawrence, Secretary of State for India, Sir Stafford Cripps, and President of the Board 
of Trade and Mr. A.V. Alexander, first Lord of the Amiralty arrived In India on 
March 25, 1946. The mission was sent to India to hold discussions with Indian 
political leaders to set up a Constituent Assembly to prepare the constitution for free 
India and to bring an understanding among the main political powers for appointing 
Indian in the Executive Council. After prolonged discussions with Indian leaders at 
Simla, the Mission announced its plan to settle the political deadlock in India. 
The salient features of the Cabinet Mission’s Plan were, a Federal government 
for the whole of India including the native states would be set up and it was to be in 
charge of defence, foreign affairs and communications. A Constituent Assembly 
should be formed to frame a constitution for India. An Interim Government, enjoying 
the support of the major political parties should be formed till transfer of power and 
the new constitution was launched as early as possible. British paramountry over the 
Indian native states would lapse after the transfer of power. The Cabinet Mission 
rejected the demand of the Muslim League for a separate sovereign state of Pakistan 
as impracticable. 
But it recommended the grant of great autonomy to the provinces and except 
the three subjects defence, foreign affairs and communications and all residuary 
powers should vest in the provinces. Moreover, provinces should be free to form 
separate groups with their own executives and legislatures. The six Hindu-majority 
Provinces (Madras, Bombay, Central Provinces, United Provinces, Bihar and Orissa) 
would form Group A. The Muslim-majority provinces in the north-west (the Punjab, 
the NWFP and Sind) would form Group B. Benpi and Assam would form Group C 

The Chief Commissioner’ Provinces of Delhi, Ajmir-Merwara, Coorg would join 
Group B. The ‘full autonomy” of the provinces and the provision for grouping were 
meant, to give the League the substance of Pakistan. St was clear that Group B and C 
would be under the absolute control of the Muslims. 
The Constituent Assembly and interim Government, 1946-1947 
The Cabinet Mission’s Plan was accepted by all parties. Then, elections were 
held for the Constituent Assembly in July 1946, The Congress enjoyed majority. The 
‘commanding position of the Congress alarmed Mr. Jirwah. There arose difficulty 
concerning the formation of the Interim Government. The Congress rejected the idea 
of Lord Waved to fonts an interim Government on the basis of parity between the 
Hindus, Including the Scheduled castes and the Muslim League. The attempt of the 
Muslim League to form the Interim Government excluding the Congress was not. 
Acceptable to the government. On 22 July, Lord Waveli put up a new proposal; He 
proposed the information of a National Government consisting of 14 members, 6 
representing the Congress including the representative of the Scheduled Castes and 
five representing the Muslim League. The Congress could nominate nationalist 
Muslims within its quota. The Congress accepted this proposal. But the Muslim 
League insisted on the Congress-League parity. 
On July 29, 1946, the Muslim League decided to withdraw its acceptance of 
the Cabinet Mission’s plan and also decided to attain Pakistan by direct action. In 
protest, the Muslim League began the “Direct Action Day’ on 17th August, 1946. It 
resulted in serious Hindu-Muslim riots all over India. In the meantime an Interim 
Government was set up on September 2, 1946 at the centre with Pandit ]awaharlal 
Nehur as Prime Minister at the invitation of Lord Waveli. On October, 1946, the 
Muslims of two Musiim-mafority districts in Bengal (Noakhali and Tipperah) fell 
upon their Hindu neighbours and committed horrible murders and other unspeakable 
atrocities. Gandhiji undertook a walking tour through the villages of Naokhali to 
pacify the people. Riots then broke out in Bihar, U.P and In Bombay and many 
Muslims suffered. Due to Lord Wavetl’s continued negotiations with Jinnah, he 

agreed to join the Indian Government. As a result five Muslim League nominees 
joined the Interim Government on October 26, 1946. The five names sent by Jinnah, 
included Liaquat Alik Khan, I.I. Chundrigar, A.R. Nishtar, Ghazanfar Ali Khan and 
Jogendra Nath Mandal. The Interim Government could not work on the principle of 
collective responsibility. Even after joining the Interim Government, the League 
persisted In Its refusal to join the Constituent Assembly. 
The British Government invited the Viceroy and representatives of the 
Congress, Muslim League and the Sikhs in London to bring- an understanding 
between the Congress md the League about the working of the constituent Assembly. 
In that conference, the congress was represented by Pandit Nehru and the League by 
Mr. Jinnah. After discussions with them, the British Government issued a statement 
on December 6, 1946 appeasing the League by interpreting the Grouping Formula as 
desired by it. Even then, the Muslim league boycotted the Constituent Assembly. The 
first sessiors of the Constituent Assembly began at New Delhi on December 9, 1946. 
The Muslim League did not participate in it. Pandit Nehru moved the main resolution 
on the declaration of objective and it was adopted on January 22, 1947. This 
resolution bid down the principle that Indian would be an “Independent Sovereign 
Republic”. Later on, it became the basis of the Preamble of the Indian constitution. 
The new Constitution of India was framed under the chairmanship of Dr. Rajendra 
Prasad. He became the first president of Indian Republic in 1950. He wrote many 
books. The most important book is ‘Divided India’. After his retirement in 1962, he 
made Sadaqat Ashram as his permanent home. The Chairman of the Drafting 
committee of the Constituent Assembly was Dr. B.R. Ambedkar. 
Mountbatten Plan 
The Muslim League steadily reftised to co-operate with the Congress as it 
continued to insist on Pakistan. Hence the political situation in the country began to 
grow worse day by day. On February 20, 1947 Lord Attlee announced in the House of 
Commons that the British government decided to quit India by the end of June, 1948. 
Muslim League once again declared “Direct Action” with a view to secure Pakistan. 

Riots murders, arson and foot once again broke out in Punjab, Bengal and NWFP. In 
NWFP, the Congress leader, Khan Abdul Ghalfar Khan started the Red Shirt 
Movement for gaining an Independent pathan state. A large number of Hindus and 
Sikhs were murdered at Rawalpindi. 
Admiral the Viscount of Mountbatten succeeded Wavell as Viceroy on 24th 
March, 1947. He started negotiations with Indian leaders with a view to bring about a 
solution of the Indian problem agreeable to all political parties. He came to the 
conclusion that compromise between the League and the Congress could not be 
possible on the basis of a united India. Therefore, he worked on principles of the 
partition of India which could be agreed both by the Congress and the League. Both 
the Congress and the Muslim League accepted the Plan and partition. On 3rd June, 
1947, Mountbatten published a statement outlining his solution of India’s political 
problem. It was called as Mountbatten Plan. It laid down detailed principles for the 
partition of India and a speedy transfer of political power in the form of Dominion 
Status to India and Pakistan. 
The main points of Mountbatten’s plan for transfer of power were the Muslim 
majority provinces would be permitted to form a separate state and set up a new 
Constituent Assembly for that purpose. As regards Bengal and the Punjab, the 
Legislative Assemblies would decide whether these provinces were to be partitioned 
or not. A referendum was to be held in the district of Sylhet in Assam to decide 
whether that district would remain a part of Assam (in India) or Join East Bengal (in 
Pakistan). A referendum was also to be held in the NWFP to decide whether that 
province would join Pakistan or remain in India. Boundary commissions would be set 
up to fix the frontiers between Hindu and Muslim areas in Punjab and Bengal. The 
native states were given the option to join either Pakistan or the Indian Union. A bill 
would be introduced in Parliament at once to give effect to these proposals. 
India Independence Act, 1947 
The Mountbatten Plan was accepted by the principal political parties in India. It 
was necessary to give legal effect to the proposal for the partition of India and also to 

make provision for the transfer of power. 
 
Therefore, the British Parliament passed the Mountbatten Plan in the form of Indian 
Independence Act In July, 1947, The Act of 1947 provided for the partition of India 
and the establishment of two dominions, India and Pakistan. Pakistan was granted 
independence on August I 4, 1947. India was given independence on August 15, 1947. 
Lord Mountbatten became the first Governor-General of Independent India. He was 
succeeded by-Mr. Rajagopalachari in 1948. Muhammed All Jinnah became the first 
Governor-General of Pakistan. After his death, he was succeeded by Mr. Nairmuddin 
in September, 1948. The legislatures of two dominions were given full power to make 
laws for the Dominions concerned and no Act of the British Parliament would extend 
to either of them. The British Government was to have no control over the affairs of 
the dominions, provinces after August 15, 1947. 
A Constituent Assembly was formed by each dominion in order to draw a 
constitution. Till a new constitution was framed by each dominion, all the provinces 
should be administered in accordance with the Government of India Act of 1935. The 
British Government was to transfer all the powers to the Constituent Assemblies of 
the two Dominions. The Governor General was given the power to modify or adopt 
the Government of India Act of 1935 till March 1948 if it is necessary. The right of 
the king to veto laws or to reserve laws for his pleasure was given up. The act 
provided for the termination of the suzerainty of die crown over die Indian states. All 
treaties, agreements and functions exercise able by His Majesty with regard to states 
and their rulers were to be lapsed from August 15, 1947. Agreements with the tribes 
of the North Western Frontier province of India were to be negotiated by the successor 
dominion. The office of the Secretary of State for India was to be abolished and his 
work was to be taken over by the Secretary of State for Commonwealth Affairs. The 
title of “Emperor of India” was to be dropped by the British king. Both the dominions 
were given full powers to join or leave the British Commonwealth nations. 
The Indian Independence Act of 1947 was a great landmark In the Anglo-

Indian relation. It matted the end of the British rule In India and ushered the dawn of a 
free India. But unfortunately it divided India into two dominions. Politically, the two 
states have become rivals rather than allies. 
 
Gandhiji played an important role in the Indian National Movement to achieve 
independence. Mountbatten halted Gandhiji as the Architect of India’s Independence. 
But unfortunately Gandhiji was shot down dead on January 30, 1948 by a Hindu 
fanatic, Nathuram Vinayak Godse at the Biria House prayer meeting. Jawaharlal 
Nehru the first prime Minister of India paid tributes to the Mahatma Gandhiji in the 
Parliament said, “The divine lamp of Gandhiji’s life will continue to spread light even 
after centuries”. 
